# Thoughts on head and heart knowledge

There is an issue we must face when it comes to gospel motivation. Pastors and teachers especially should be concerned about this, but all Christians should be concerned about it too. It’s one of those issues—actually it is a way of talking—that is naturally cleared up when a person understands gospel motivation. The statement comes in two forms. First, the statement is made that if we are going to have an effect on people’s lives, we have to speak not just to their heads but to their hearts as well. Or, Christianity is not just head knowledge; it is heart knowledge. Second, the statement is made that if Christian teachers are going to have an influence, they must teach people not just so their heads are filled with knowledge but so they are moved to action.

But how do we speak to the head and to the heart? How do we teach so that we effect a change in a person? I have to admit that the whole distinction between head and heart knowledge puzzles me. Or to use another term that is used to describe good teaching today, I am really not sure how I should be teaching “affectively.”

How did Paul teach? Remember, the section at which we have been looking (Romans 6) is at the heart of his teaching about the Christian life. If there is any place he should be teaching to the heart, and if there is any place he should be teaching “affectively,” it is here. So how does he do it? He appeals to what we know. He amplifies on the gospel that all of us hold dear. Notice how many times he appeals to what we know (for Western-audiences, what we have stored in our head): “Don’t you know” (verse 3); “for we know” (verse 6); “we believe” (verse 8); “for we know” (verse 9); “count yourselves” (verse 11); “don’t you know” (verse 16); “you wholeheartedly obeyed the form of teaching” (verse 17). Paul appeals to what his readers know, and he expands on their knowledge; he explains what the gospel means and describes in vivid terms the status we have as people who obey the gospel.

If we are to learn anything from Paul’s method of encouraging sanctification, it is this: Explain the gospel and expand on the gospel. Describe in as many ways as you can what the gospel means for that Christian friend who needs to be built up in the faith. “What does the gospel mean for you? This is what it means... .” “What have you become as one who believes the gospel? This is what you have become... .” “How should you live as a child of God? This is how you should live, and as I explain this to you, I will also tell you why you should live this way.”

If there is just criticism that Christian teachers appeal too much to the head and not enough to the heart, it has nothing to do with their manner of speaking, their sincerity, their body language, or any of that. It may be that too much Bible study time is wasted on biblical facts or on a close examination of the laws of God. Too much time is spent on side matters in order to avoid wrestling with the gospel and, through it, seeing the depth of God’s love for us. (This is a strong statement, I know. But forgive me, dear reader, for I am speaking to myself if not to you.) If we mine the depth of Scripture and ask the Lord to teach us through those words to better know our inheritance in Christ, we will never be speaking merely to the head but always to the heart as well.

The sad thing about speaking of head versus heart when we talk about motivating Christians to action is that the head always comes up short. Yet knowledge, cognitive perception, of the gospel is what we need above all else, and shortchanging the mind may be setting up a roadblock to the very thing that alone will lead us to grow to live as God’s willing slaves. Scripture does indeed make a distinction between heart and mind. Jesus said, “Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul] and with all your mind and with all your strength” (Mark 12:30). Yet analyze this verse from Paul:

I pray also that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints. (Ephesians 1:18)

It is hard to separate head and heart in that passage. To know the hope to which the Lord has called us is to have hearts filled with a desire to please the Lord. Or consider this passage:

I pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power through his Spirit in your inner being, so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. And I pray that you, being rooted and established in love, may have power, together with all the saints, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ, and to know this love that surpasses knowledge—that you may be filled to the measure of all the fullness of God. (Ephesians 3:16)

That pretty much says it all. We are doing our work as Christian teachers if we lead people into the depth of the gospel and then pray that God use our words to strengthen our hearers, praying that the Lord will establish them in his love so that they can understand that love to its furthest limit. Then we will reach the heart, mind, emotions, will, personality, and whatever other categories we may assign to the spiritual side of our beings.

To encourage teachers to speak to the head and heart may have its place. But it seems more constructive simply to exam-

ine sections of Scripture like Romans 6 and pattern our preaching and teaching on Paul’s way of speaking. Doing that, we will cover all the bases.
