# 参考书目

- Barrett, *The Epistle to the Romans* (Lynn, MA: Hendrickson, 1991).
- Bowersock, G. W., *Martyrdom and Rome* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
- Bruce, F. F., *Apostle of the Heart Set Free* (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1977).
- Becker Siegbert, *A Transcript of Dr. S. Becker's Lectures on Romans*, transcribed by Gerhold Lemke (Mequon, WI: Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Press, 1992).
- Danker, Frederick William. ed., *A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature*, 3rd edition (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2000).
- Ferguson, John, *The Religions of the Roman Empire* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell, 1970).
- Fredrich, Edward. C., "Practical Exegesis of Romans 13:1-7: God's Governments are to be Obeyed by God's People," Michigan District Convention, 1976. Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Essay File, http://www.wlsessays.net/node/550 (accessed 15 Dec. 2014).
- Jacobs, Henry Eyster, *Annotations on the Epistles of Paul to the Romans and I. Corinthians, Chaps I.-VI.*, The Lutheran Commentary Vol. VII (New York: The Christian Literature Company, 1895).
- Josephus, *The Works of Josephus*, trans. William Whiston (Lynn, MA: Hendrickson, 1980).
- Lawrenz, Carl, "Of God, Civic Righteousness, and Their Application to the Boy Scout Question," *Wisconsin Lutheran Quarterly* vol 69, No 2, April 1972, pg. 74.
- Linder, Amnon, "The Legal Status of the Jews in the Roman Empire," *The Cambridge History of Judaism*, vol 4., ed. Steven T. Katz (Cambridge, 2006).
- Luther, Martin. "Admonition to Peace: A Reply to the Twelve Articles of the Peasants in Swabia," in *Luther's Works*, Vol. 46. American Edition. 55 vols.; ed. Jaroslav Pelikan and Helmut T. Lehmann. (Philadelphia: Muehlenberg and Fortress, and St. Louis: Concordia, 1955-86).
- ——. "Temporal Authority: To What Extent It Should Be Obeyed," in *Luther's Works*, Vol. 45. American Edition. 55 vols.; ed. Jaroslav Pelikan and Helmut T. Lehmann. (Philadelphia: Muehlenberg and Fortress, and St. Louis: Concordia, 1955-86).
- ——. "Preface to the Letter of St. Paul to the Romans," trans. Andrew Thornton, 1983, Christian Classics Ethereal Library, http://www.ccel.org/l/luther/romans/pref_romans.html (accessed December 30, 2014).
- Kurlansky, Mark, *Nonviolence: The History of a Dangerous Idea* (New York: Modern Library, 2004).
- McGeough, Kevin M. *The Romans: New Perspectives* (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC Clio, 2004).
- Millar, Fergus. *The Greek World, The Jews, & The East*, ed. Hannah M. Cotton, Guy M. Rogers, *Rome, The Greek World, and the East*, vol 3. (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2006).
- ——. *Government, Society, & Culture in the Roman Empire*, ed. Hannah M. Cotton, Guy M. Rogers, *Rome, The Greek World, and the East*, vol 2. (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2006).
- Moiser, J., "Rethinking Romans 12-15," *New Testament Studies* 36 (1990).
- Moo, Douglas J. *The Epistle to the Romans*, NICOT (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1996).
- Morgan, Robert, *Romans* (Sheffield, England: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995).
- Moulton, Carroll, ed. *Ancient Greece and Rome: An Encyclopedia for Students*, 4 vol. (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1998).
- Praet, Danny, "Violence against Christians and Violence by Christians in the First Three Centuries: Direct Violence, Cultural Violence and the Debate about Christian Exclusiveness", *Violence in Ancient Christianity*, ed. Albert C. Geljon and Riemer Roukema, (Brill: Leiden, Boston, 2014).
- Sherwin-White, A. N., *Roman Society and Roman Law in the New Testament* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1963).
- Schroeder, Keith, "An Exegesis of Romans 13:1-7," Minnesota District Pastoral Conference, April 23-24, 1974. Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Essay File, http://www.wlsessays.net/node/1693 (accessed 15 Dec. 2014).
- Talbert, C., *Romans* (Macon: Smyth and Helwys, 2002).
- Wallace, Daniel B. *Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics* (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996).
- Wendland, Ernst, "Stand Fast in the True Grace of God!: A Study of 1 Peter," Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Essay File, http://www.wlsessays.net/node/886 (accessed 10 Dec, 2014).
- Wilken, Robert Louis, ed. *The Church's Bible* (Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, 2012).
- Witherington III, Ben, *Paul's Letter to the Romans: A Socio-Rhetorical Commentary* (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004).
