# Introduction to Part One

Working Backwards
## ** Introduction to Part One**

In the first half of this book, we will lay out in detail some of the crucial principles and processes that define* being Amazonian.* These ways of working—patiently honed over the years—have enabled Amazon’s remarkable efficiency and its record-breaking growth. They have made Amazon’s culture one in which invention thrives and delighting customers is highly prioritized. We will tell some of the origin stories of these principles and processes to demonstrate that they were solutions to problems that were impeding our ability to invent freely and satisfy our customers consistently.

The Amazon Leadership Principles are the main focus of chapter one. In the very early days of the company, when it consisted of a handful of people working out of three small rooms, there were no formal leadership principles because, in a sense, Jeff was the leadership principles. He wrote the job descriptions, interviewed candidates, packed and shipped boxes, and read every email that went out to customers. Taking part in every aspect of the business allowed him to communicate the Amazon philosophy informally to the relatively small group of employees. But the company expanded so quickly that it was soon impossible to communicate it that way anymore. Thus, the need for the Leadership Principles. We tell the story of the process by which they were created—itself a quintessentially Amazonian story—and we describe how they are infused into every capillary of the company’s operation.

Hand in hand with the Leadership Principles go the mechanisms, which we also discuss in chapter one. These are the consistent, repeated processes that ensure the Leadership Principles are reinforced year to year and day to day in the company. We enumerate the method by which Amazon generates its yearly plans and goals for each individual team and for the company as a whole, and how it creates alignment between the team goals and the company goals. We also describe Amazon’s distinctive compensation policy, which reinforces collaboration and long-term focus over intramural competition and orientation toward short-term gains.

In chapter two, we discuss the Bar Raiser, Amazon’s unique hiring process. Like the Leadership Principles, we created the Bar Raiser because the company was growing extremely fast. One of the major pitfalls of needing to hire a lot of new people very quickly is urgency bias: the tendency to overlook a candidate’s flaws because you are overwhelmed with work and need bodies. The Bar Raiser provides teams with methods to make the strongest hires efficiently and quickly, but without cutting corners.

In a company known for its inventiveness, separable, single-threaded leadership has been one of Amazon’s most useful inventions. We discuss it in chapter three. This is the organizational strategy that minimizes the drag on efficiency created by intra-organizational dependencies. The basic premise is, for each initiative or project, there is a single leader whose focus is that project and that project alone, and that leader oversees teams of people whose attention is similarly focused on that one project. This chapter is as much the story of how we arrived at single-threaded leadership as it is a description of it: we outline the problems it was created to solve, and the imperfect solutions we developed before we came to the one that really works. We’ll also discuss how and why we had to completely change the way we built and deployed technology in order to make separable, single-threaded teams a reality.

We also found that what really works in meetings is not what most companies do in meetings. As much as we respect PowerPoint as a visual communication tool and speaking aid, we learned the hard way that it’s not the best format to communicate complex information about initiatives and ongoing projects in a one-hour meeting. We found, instead, that a six-page narrative written by a given team is the method that best enables everyone in a meeting to get up to speed quickly and efficiently on the project that team is working on. At the same time, the process of composing that narrative requires the team itself to reflect on the work they’ve been doing or propose to do, and to articulate it clearly to others, thereby sharpening their own thinking about that work. We discuss the details of this genre of narrative—and give an example of one—in chapter four.

In chapter five, we discuss how new ideas and products are developed at Amazon: Working Backwards from the desired customer experience. Before we start building, we write a Press Release to clearly define how the new idea or product will benefit customers, and we create a list of Frequently Asked Questions to resolve the tough issues up front. We carefully and critically study and modify each of these documents until we’re satisfied before we move on to the next step.

The customer is also at the center of how we analyze and manage performance metrics. Our emphasis is on what we call controllable input metrics, rather than output metrics. Controllable input metrics (e.g., reducing internal costs so you can affordably lower product prices, adding new items for sale on the website, or reducing standard delivery time) measure the set of activities that, if done well, will yield the desired results, or output metrics (such as monthly revenue and stock price). We detail these metrics as well as how to discover and track them in chapter six.

Part one does not comprise an exhaustive list of principles and processes developed at Amazon. We selected the ones that we think best illustrate what it means to be Amazonian. We will show you how we arrived at each one of them. And we will give you concrete, actionable information that will help you hone the methods by which your company or organization, big or small, can maximize its potential to serve its customers.
