# 1. Building Blocks: Leadership Principles and Mechanisms

Working Backwards
## ** 1**

## ** Building Blocks**

### ** Leadership Principles and Mechanisms**

* The development of the 14 Amazon Leadership Principles. How they’re infused into everyday work. Checks and balances (mechanisms) reinforce them. Why they confer a significant competitive advantage. How they can be applied in your company.*

* * *

Amazon.com opened for business in July 1995, staffed by a handful of people handpicked by Jeff Bezos. In 1994, Jeff had read a report that projected annual internet usage growth at 2,300 percent. He was then a senior vice president at D. E. Shaw & Co., a New York hedge fund specializing in sophisticated mathematical models to exploit market inefficiencies. He decided that getting in on the growth of the Web was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, so he gave up his lucrative and promising career and drove west with his wife, MacKenzie, to start an internet business.

Along the way to Seattle, he wrote his business plan. He identified several reasons why the book category was underserved and well suited to online commerce. He outlined how he could create a new and compelling experience for book-buying customers. To begin with, books were relatively lightweight and came in fairly uniform sizes, meaning they would be easy and inexpensive to warehouse, pack, and ship. Second, while more than 100 million books had been written and more than a million titles were in print in 1994, even a Barnes & Noble mega-bookstore could stock only tens of thousands of titles. An online bookstore, on the other hand, could offer not just the books that could fit in a brick-and-mortar store but any book in print. Third, there were two large book-distribution companies, Ingram and Baker & Taylor, that acted as intermediaries between publishers and retailers and maintained huge inventories in vast warehouses. They kept detailed electronic catalogs of books in print to make it easy for bookstores and libraries to order from them. Jeff realized that he could combine the infrastructure that Ingram and Baker & Taylor had created—warehouses full of books ready to be shipped, plus an electronic catalog of those books—with the growing infrastructure of the Web, making it possible for consumers to find and buy any book in print and get it shipped directly to their homes. Finally, the site could use technology to analyze the behavior of customers and create a unique, personalized experience for each one of them.

The first Amazonians worked elbow to elbow in three small rooms, upstairs from a converted basement filled mostly with overstock from the army surplus store across the street. Desks, including Jeff’s, had been fashioned out of doors affixed to four-by-fours with metal angle brackets. A padlocked plywood door in that basement secured the first Amazon “distribution center,” a room measuring perhaps 400 square feet that had last served as the practice space for a local band whose name was still spray-painted on the door.

In such close quarters, Jeff could take the pulse of the company—from software development to finance and operations—by turning his chair around or poking his head through the doorway of an adjoining room. He knew everyone who worked for the company and, apart from writing the all-important software, he had done each of their jobs alongside them while they learned the ropes. And, never shy about how he wanted things done, he began to instill guiding principles, like customer obsession and unrelentingly high standards, into every step his small team took.

From the tone of customer emails to the condition of the books and their packaging, Jeff had one simple rule: “It has to be perfect.” He’d remind his team that one bad customer experience would undo the goodwill of hundreds of perfect ones. When a coffee-table book arrived from the distributor with a scratch across the dust jacket, Jeff had customer service write to the customer to apologize and explain that, since coffee-table books are meant for display, a replacement copy was already on order, but shipment would be delayed—unless time was of the essence and they preferred the scratched copy right away. The customer loved the response, and decided to wait for the perfect copy while expressing their delight at receiving this surprise consideration.

Jeff also proofread customer service emails that dealt with any new topic. One day a prominent technology columnist wrote to ask a series of penetrating and challenging questions about the business, credit card security, and more. Jeff read his team’s response to the columnist, seemed to read it a second time, and then said, “That’s perfect.” After that, apparently satisfied that customer service had now internalized the core principles he insisted upon, he checked in far less frequently.

Another of Jeff’s frequent exhortations to his small staff was that Amazon should always underpromise and overdeliver, to ensure that customer expectations were exceeded. One example of this principle was that the website clearly described standard shipping as U.S. Postal Service First-Class Mail. In actuality, all these shipments were sent by Priority Mail—a far more expensive option that guaranteed delivery within two to three business days anywhere in the United States. This was called out as a complimentary upgrade in the shipment-confirmation email. Thank-you emails for the upgrade included one that read, “You guys R going to make a billion dollars.” When Jeff saw it he roared with laughter, then printed a copy to take back to his office.

The job description he wrote for his very first employee said, “You must have experience designing and building large and complex (yet maintainable) systems, and you should be able to do so in about one-third the time that most competent people think possible.”[1](text00025.html#note5a) In his very first letter to shareholders, in 1997, Jeff wrote, “When I interview people I tell them, ‘You can work long, hard, or smart, but at Amazon.com you can’t choose two out of three.’”[2](text00025.html#note6a)

In those days, the spirit of Amazon meant that most Amazonians embraced Jeff’s challenging standards. People worked a minimum of 60 hours per week, with music blasting in the office late at night, and did whatever was needed to satisfy customers. Every afternoon, Jeff would join everybody in the basement to pack customer orders, at first working on hands and knees on the concrete floor. A wide variety of orders came in ever-increasing numbers from all over the world. It quickly became clear that something very special was happening, and it was exciting to be a part of it.

The growth that followed was historic and virtually unprecedented, and it meant changes in the company. Months after moving into its first office, door desks crowded every space, so the company moved to a vastly larger office down the street. They soon burst the seams again and moved a second time. During the first critical years, Jeff could transmit the strength and clarity of his message directly to the small leadership team through daily and weekly interactions; he could be present for decisions big and small; and he could formulate and apply principles like customer obsession, innovation, frugality, personal ownership, bias for action, and high standards. But new employees—who in the beginning had each been hired personally by Jeff—quickly reached numbers that demanded new layers of leadership. By the late 1990s, the organization had grown from tens to more than 500. This fantastic growth began to limit Jeff’s ability to be fully involved in hiring leaders and inculcating them with his values. His standards could be maintained only if the company itself, from top to bottom, somehow committed to keeping them at the forefront.

In this chapter, we’ll discuss how Amazon established a set of principles and mechanisms, enabling the company to grow from a single founder to several hundred thousand employees[3](text00025.html#note7a) while remaining stubbornly true to its mission of obsessing over customers to create long-term shareholder value. Some of these methods are well known and have been widely adopted. Some are probably unique to Amazon.

What distinguishes Amazon is that its Leadership Principles are deeply ingrained in* every* significant process and function at the company. In many cases, the principles dictate a way of thinking or doing work that is different from the way that most companies operate. As a result, newly hired Amazonians go through a challenging multimonth period of learning and adapting to these new methods. Because these processes and practices are embedded in every meeting, document, decision, interview, and performance discussion, following them becomes second nature over time. And any employee who violates them draws attention to themselves like a person loudly scratching their fingernails across a chalkboard. If, for example, a person spoke up at a meeting and suggested an idea that was obviously geared toward short-term considerations and ignored significant longer-term ones, or proposed something that was competitor- rather than customer-centric, there would be an uncomfortable pause before someone pointed out what was on everyone else’s mind. While this practice may not be unique to Amazon, it is a defining element of its success.

By the late 1990s, there was a set of Amazon core competencies that every Amazonian was expected to exhibit, as well as an additional set of competencies that all managers were expected to master and employ. When I (Bill) first read through the long list of competencies as a new hire in 1999, I recall feeling a mix of inspiration and intimidation thanks to the combination of super-high standards applied across such a breadth of disciplines. I thought, “I will have to work harder and smarter than I have ever worked if I am to live up to these.”

In 2004, human resources head Mike George and his colleague Robin Andrulevich made an observation: the company had grown like a weed, adding many leaders who were inexperienced and in need of some formal management and leadership training. So Mike asked Robin to create a leadership-training program. Robin asserted that doing so would first require clearly and succinctly codifying what leadership meant at Amazon. Such an exercise would certainly delay the rollout of the program, but, after much discussion, everyone agreed it would be a worthy undertaking.

In the 2015 shareholder letter, Jeff wrote, “You can write down your corporate culture, but when you do so, you’re discovering it, uncovering it—not creating it.”[4](text00025.html#note8a) This was the assumption on which Robin had been operating when she set about to codify the Leadership Principles. She interviewed people throughout Amazon who were effective leaders and who embodied the essence of this burgeoning company. What she thought would be a two-month project took nine months to complete. But by the time she was finished, her effort had gone a long way toward identifying many of the elements that would make the company what it is today.

This initial set of Leadership Principles was basically an articulation and synthesis of the ethos of the people Robin interviewed. In a few cases, a principle was based on the leadership activities of a single person. For instance, Jeff Wilke, then SVP of Worldwide Operations and now CEO of Amazon’s Worldwide Consumer business, insisted on data-driven decision-making and frequent auditing from everyone he worked with, and this became the basis of the leadership principle Dive Deep.

Robin would review each draft with Mike and the HR leadership team. Veteran HR leaders Alison Allgor and Kristin Strout, in particular, provided valuable feedback. They’d debate each principle with a critical eye as to whether it belonged on the list. Some were jettisoned altogether if they sounded generically corporate or weren’t universally relevant. Robin and Jeff Wilke met frequently to review progress and refine the list, sometimes bringing other leaders—including Rick Dalzell, Tom Szkutak, and Jason Kilar—into the process. Robin also checked in regularly with Jeff and Colin.

I (Colin) remember one particularly intense debate that centered on the proposed phrase “Leaders do not believe their body odor smells of perfume” in the Apolitical/Vocally Self-Critical principle. Was it okay to use quirky language when communicating with a wide audience? Would people take the principles seriously if we did? In the end, we concluded that although the phrase was unconventional, it was devastatingly effective at providing clarity. Body odor stayed.

In late 2004, after months of discussion and debate, Robin emailed what she thought was the final list of nine leadership principles to Jeff. It felt like a lot at the time, but each one seemed essential, and we could not agree to strike any.

In early 2005, with the principles completed, Jeff sent an email to all managers at Amazon, formally announcing the ten Amazon Leadership Principles. Thanks to Robin, who did a superb job collecting these powerful principles, they were expressed in an actionable and distinctly Amazonian way. For example, the Insist on the Highest Standards leadership principle is described like this: “Leaders have relentlessly high standards—many people may think these standards are unreasonably high.” The words “relentlessly” and “unreasonably high” are distinctly Jeff-ian and therefore Amazonian ways of thinking and speaking.

Another important Amazonian phrase often appears alongside the Amazon Leadership Principles and key tenets: “Unless you know better ones.” This reminds people to always seek to improve the status quo.

Over the following years, some of the original ten principles underwent modification, and more were eventually added. Even today the principles are questioned and refined from time to time, adapting along with the company as new understandings and new challenges arise.

Amazon now has 14 Leadership Principles—notably more than most companies have. They are displayed right on the Amazon website along with this explanation: “We use our Leadership Principles every day, whether we’re discussing ideas for new projects or deciding on the best approach to solving a problem. It is just one of the things that makes Amazon peculiar.”[5](text00025.html#note9a)

People often ask, “How do you remember all 14 principles?” The answer is not that we are particularly good at memorization. In fact, if a company’s principles must be memorized, it’s a warning sign that they aren’t sufficiently woven into the fabric of that company. We know and remember Amazon’s principles because they are the basic framework used for making decisions and taking action. We encountered them every day, measured ourselves against them, and held one another similarly accountable. The longer you work at Amazon, the more these 14 principles become part of you and how you look at the world.

If you expose the workings of any major Amazon process, you’ll see these principles playing a prominent role; employee performance evaluations highlight this perfectly. Much of the peer and manager feedback used in these evaluations focuses on how a person exhibited, or fell short of exhibiting, the Amazon Leadership Principles during the review period. Similarly, every candidate who interviews for a job at Amazon is evaluated in light of the Leadership Principles. Interviewers spend the better part of an hour vetting the candidate according to selected principles, and each candidate typically goes through five to seven interviews. Add in a 30–60 minute debrief meeting attended by each interviewer, multiply that by the number of open positions—10,000 in Seattle alone at the time of this writing—and you begin to understand why Amazon people know the principles intimately. Far from being mere catchphrases on a poster or screensaver, Amazon’s Leadership Principles are the company’s living, breathing constitution.

** Amazon’s Leadership Principles[6](text00025.html#note10a)**

** 1. Customer Obsession.** Leaders start with the customer and work backwards. They work vigorously to earn and keep customer trust. Although leaders pay attention to competitors, they obsess over customers.

** 2. Ownership.** Leaders are owners. They think long term and don’t sacrifice long-term value for short-term results. They act on behalf of the entire company, beyond just their own team. They never say, “that’s not my job.”

** 3. Invent and Simplify.** Leaders expect and require innovation and invention from their teams and always find ways to simplify. They are externally aware, look for new ideas from everywhere, and are not limited by “not invented here.” As we do new things, we accept that we may be misunderstood for long periods of time.

** 4. Are Right, A Lot.** Leaders are right a lot. They have strong judgment and good instincts. They seek diverse perspectives and work to disconfirm their beliefs.

** 5. Learn and Be Curious.** Leaders are never done learning and always seek to improve themselves. They are curious about new possibilities and act to explore them.

** 6. Hire and Develop the Best.** Leaders raise the performance bar with every hire and promotion. They recognize exceptional talent, and willingly move them throughout the organization. Leaders develop leaders and take seriously their role in coaching others. We work on behalf of our people to invent mechanisms for development like Career Choice.

** 7. Insist on the Highest Standards.** Leaders have relentlessly high standards—many people may think these standards are unreasonably high. Leaders are continually raising the bar and drive their teams to deliver high-quality products, services, and processes. Leaders ensure that defects do not get sent down the line and that problems are fixed so they stay fixed.

** 8. Think Big.** Thinking small is a self-fulfilling prophecy. Leaders create and communicate a bold direction that inspires results. They think differently and look around corners for ways to serve customers.

** 9. Bias for Action.** Speed matters in business. Many decisions and actions are reversible and do not need extensive study. We value calculated risk-taking.

** 10. Frugality.** Accomplish more with less. Constraints breed resourcefulness, self-sufficiency, and invention. There are no extra points for growing headcount, budget size, or fixed expense.

** 11. Earn Trust.** Leaders listen attentively, speak candidly, and treat others respectfully. They are vocally self-critical, even when doing so is awkward or embarrassing. Leaders do not believe their or their team’s body odor smells of perfume. They benchmark themselves and their teams against the best.

** 12. Dive Deep.** Leaders operate at all levels, stay connected to the details, audit frequently, and are skeptical when metrics and anecdotes differ. No task is beneath them.

** 13. Have Backbone; Disagree and Commit.** Leaders are obligated to respectfully challenge decisions when they disagree, even when doing so is uncomfortable or exhausting. Leaders have conviction and are tenacious. They do not compromise for the sake of social cohesion. Once a decision is determined, they commit wholly.

** 14. Deliver Results.** Leaders focus on the key inputs for their business and deliver them with the right quality and in a timely fashion. Despite setbacks, they rise to the occasion and never settle.

The nature of the Amazon Leadership Principles is borne out in processes and practices throughout the company. For example, the six-page narratives that the company uses in place of PowerPoint decks to present quarterly and yearly business updates require both the writer and reader to Dive Deep and Insist on the Highest Standards. The Press Release/Frequently Asked Questions process—aka PR/FAQ—reinforces customer obsession, starting with customer needs and working backwards from there. (See chapters[four](text00009.html#Page_79) and[five](text00010.html#Page_98) for a detailed discussion of both the six-pager and the PR/FAQ.) The Door Desk Award goes to a person who exemplifies Frugality and Invention. The Just Do It Award is an abnormally large, well-worn Nike sneaker given to employees who exhibit a Bias for Action. It usually goes to a person who has come up with a clever idea outside the scope of their job. What’s peculiarly Amazonian about the award is that the idea doesn’t have to be implemented—nor does it have to actually work if it is—in order to be eligible.

The stories we tell in part two of this book about the long, hard road to launching some of Amazon’s most successful services—Kindle, Prime, and Amazon Web Services—will provide in-depth examples of the Leadership Principles in action.

Still, even though the Leadership Principles are embedded into the fabric of the company, they cannot effectively enforce themselves—that’s the job of something that Amazonians call* mechanisms* .

### ** Mechanisms: Reinforcing the Leadership Principles**

There’s a saying often heard at Amazon: “Good intentions don’t work. Mechanisms do.” No company can rely on good intentions like “We must try harder!” or “Next time remember to . . .” to improve a process, solve a problem, or fix a mistake. That’s because people already had good intentions when the problems cropped up in the first place. Amazon realized early on that if you don’t change the underlying condition that created a problem, you should expect the problem to recur.

Over the course of many years, Amazon has put in place mechanisms to ensure that the Leadership Principles translate into action. Three foundational mechanisms are: the annual planning process; the S-Team goals process (the S-Team consists of the senior vice presidents and direct reports to Jeff Bezos); and Amazon’s compensation plan, which aligns incentives with what’s best for customers and the company over the long term.

#### Annual Planning: OP1 and OP2

Amazon relies heavily on autonomous, single-threaded teams (more in chapter three). These teams keep the company nimble, moving quickly with a minimum of external friction, but their autonomy must be paired with precise goal-setting to align each team’s independent plans with the company’s overarching goals.

Amazon’s planning for the calendar year begins in the summer. It’s a painstaking process that requires four to eight weeks of intensive work for the managers and many staff members of every team in the company. This intensity is deliberate, because a poorly defined plan—or worse, no plan at all—can incur a much greater downstream cost.

The S-Team begins by creating a set of high-level expectations or objectives for the entire company. For example, in previous years, the CEO and CFO would articulate goals like “Grow revenue from $10 billion to $15 billion” or “Reduce fixed costs by 5 percent.” Over time, Amazon refined such broad goals into a longer list of increasingly detailed objectives. Examples have included: revenue growth targets by geography and business segment; operating leverage targets; improving productivity and giving back those savings to customers in the form of lower prices; generating strong free cash flow; and understanding the level of investment in new businesses, products, and services.

Once these high-level expectations are established, each group begins work on its own more granular operating plan—known as OP1—which sets out the individual group’s “bottom-up” proposal. Through the narrative process (described in chapter four), Amazon aims to evaluate about ten times as much information as the typical company does in a similar time frame. The main components of an OP1 narrative are:
- Assessment of past performance, including goals achieved, goals missed, and lessons learned
- Key initiatives for the following year
- A detailed income statement
- Requests (and justifications) for resources, which may include things like new hires, marketing spend, equipment, and other fixed assets

Each group works in partnership with its finance and human resources counterparts to create their detailed plan, which is then presented to a panel of leaders. The level of those leaders—director, VP, or S-Team—depends on the size, impact, or strategic importance of the group. The panel then reconciles any gaps between the bottom-up proposal and the top-down goals the group has been asked to meet. Sometimes a team may be asked to rework its plan and re-present it until there’s agreement between the top-down goals and bottom-up plan.

The OP1 process runs through the fall and is completed before the fourth-quarter holiday rush begins. In January, after the holiday season ends, OP1 is adjusted as necessary to reflect the fourth-quarter results, as well as to update the trajectory of the business. This shorter process is called OP2, and it generates the plan of record for the calendar year.

OP2 aligns each group with the goals of the company. Everybody knows their overall objectives, including targets for revenue, cost, and performance. The metrics are agreed upon and will be supplied as part of every team’s deliverables. OP2 makes it crystal clear what each group has committed to do, how they intend to achieve those goals, and what resources they need to get the work done.

Some variances are inevitable, but any change to OP2 requires formal S-Team approval.

#### S-Team Goals

During OP1, as the S-Team reads and reviews the various operating plans, they select the initiatives and goals from each team that they consider to be the most important to achieve. These selected goals are called, unsurprisingly,* S-Team goals* . In other words, my (Bill’s) team working on Amazon Music might have had 23 goals and initiatives in our 2012 operating plan. After reviewing our plan with us, the S-Team might have chosen six of the 23 to become S-Team goals. The music team would still have worked to achieve all 23 goals, but it would be sure to make resource allocation decisions throughout the year to prioritize the six S-Team goals ahead of the remaining 17.

Three notably Amazonian features of S-Team goals are their unusually large number, their level of detail, and their aggressiveness. S-Team goals once numbered in the dozens, but these have expanded to many hundreds every year, scattered across the entire company.

S-Team goals are mainly input-focused metrics that measure the specific activities teams need to perform during the year that, if achieved, will yield the desired business results. In chapter six, we will discuss in more detail how Amazon develops such precise and specific metrics to ensure teams meet their business objectives. S-Team goals must be Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and Timely (SMART). An actual S-Team goal could be as specific as “Add 500 new products in the amazon.fr Musical Instruments category (100 products in Q1, 200 in Q2 . . .),” or “Ensure 99.99 percent of all calls to software service ‘Y’ are successfully responded to within 10 milliseconds,” or “Increase repeat advertisers from 50 percent to 75 percent by Q3 of next year.”

S-Team goals are aggressive enough that Amazon only expects about three-quarters of them to be fully achieved during the year. Hitting every one of them would be a clear sign that the bar had been set too low.

S-Team goals for the entire company are aggregated and their metrics are tracked with centralized tools by the finance team. Each undergoes an intensive quarterly review that calls for thorough preparation. Reviews are conducted in multihour S-Team meetings scheduled on a rolling basis over the quarter rather than all at once. At many companies, when the senior leadership meets, they tend to focus more on big-picture, high-level strategy issues than on execution. At Amazon, it’s the opposite. Amazon leaders toil over the execution details and regularly embody the Dive Deep leadership principle, which states: “Leaders operate at all levels, stay connected to the details, audit frequently, and are skeptical when metrics and anecdotes differ. No task is beneath them.”

The finance team tracks the S-Team goals throughout the year with a status of green, yellow, and red. Green means you are on track, yellow means there is some risk of missing the goal, and red means you are not likely to hit the goal unless something meaningful changes. During the periodic reviews, yellow or red status draws the team’s attention where it’s needed most, and a frank discussion about what’s wrong and how it will be addressed ensues.

The OP planning process aligns the entire company on what’s truly important to accomplish for the year. S-Team goals refine that alignment by giving top priority to the company’s biggest or most pressing objectives. The review cadence helps maintain alignment, no matter what happens along the way. This structure ensures that every goal that’s important to the company has someone—an accountable owner—working on it.

Last, as Amazon has grown, the planning process has evolved with it. While the overall structure remains the same, there are now separate leadership teams for the retail business and AWS—and even separate teams for the large businesses within those parts of the company. Each of these parts of the company has its own version of “S-Team goals,” just with a different label. As your organization grows, you can follow this recursive process too.

#### Amazon Compensation Reinforces Long-Term Thinking

Even the very best of all these preparations can still be subverted by other factors—the most insidious of which is a certain type of “performance-based” executive compensation that’s all too common elsewhere. No matter how clear your leadership principles and yearly plan may be, they speak softly in comparison to financial incentives. Money talks—if your leadership principles, your yearly plan, and your financial incentives are not closely aligned, you won’t get the right results.

Amazon believes that the “performance” in performance-based compensation must refer to the company’s overall performance, that is, the best interests of shareholders, which in turn are perfectly aligned with the best interests of customers. Accordingly, the compensation of Amazon S-Team members and all senior leaders is heavily weighted toward equity earned over a period of several years. The maximum salary itself is set well below that of industry peers in the United States. When we were there, the maximum base salary for any employee was $160,000 (indications are that this remains true). Some new executive hires may receive a signing bonus, but the bulk of their compensation—and the potentially enormous upside—is the long-term value of the company.

The wrong kind of compensation practice can cause misalignment in two ways: (1) by rewarding short-term goals at the expense of long-term value creation, and (2) by rewarding the achievement of localized departmental milestones whether or not they benefit the company as a whole. Both can powerfully drive behaviors that are antithetical to the company’s ultimate goals.

In other industries, such as media and financial services, a large percentage of executive compensation is doled out in annual performance bonuses. These short-term goals (and yes, a year is definitely short term) can generate behaviors that are detrimental to creating long-term value. In seeking short-term targets to maximize compensation, some may intentionally push revenue from one time period to the next, cannibalizing future results and obscuring current challenges. Others might overspend marketing funds to boost sales for the current quarter and thus hit a short-term sales goal, even at the expense of future quarters or long-term sales. Some might be tempted to defer expenses, put off maintenance, or cut back on hiring in order to hit a quarterly cost-containment target—all with negative longer-term implications. A few may even drag their feet if asked to take on an important new role in the company until their bonus is “in the bank,” delaying some important company initiative. Long-term stock-based compensation incentives, by comparison, eliminate such selfish and costly decisions by making them nonsensical.

Many companies set entirely independent goals for key players at every level. All too often this gives rise to infighting, information withholding, and hoarding of resources, as each leader is incentivized to undermine the other. Amazon’s compensation is, by contrast, simple and oriented toward the long term. As one is promoted at Amazon, the ratio of cash to equity compensation becomes more and more skewed toward long-term equity. The Frugality leadership principle makes the reason very plain: “There are no extra points for headcount, budget size, or expense.”

One clear downside to this approach is that other companies with deep pockets can try to hire away your best employees with big cash offers. It’s true, some employees leave for a short-term jump in their cash compensation. But on the positive side, Amazon’s approach reinforces the kind of culture it seeks to develop. Sometimes it is okay to lose people who have a short-term focus while retaining those who are in it for the long term.

Amazon uses a similar long-term equity structure in order to prevent potential conflicts of interest in its wholly owned subsidiaries, including IMDb, Zappos, and Twitch. Executives in those companies are compensated in the same manner as other Amazon executives, primarily with a base salary and a heavy emphasis on Amazon equity, which encourages collaboration.

* * *

There’s no magic number of principles and mechanisms that every company will need. The magic lives in the moments when the principles are put into practice. You’ll develop the number that’s right for you, provided that you focus on how these principles will give clarity to your company’s vision and drive the right behaviors to create meaningful value for your shareholders and stakeholders over the long term—even when the CEO is not in the room.

It’s important too to allow your principles to evolve when necessary—to revise, cut, and add as the company grows and changes. Learn and Be Curious was the most recent addition for Amazon. Being Vocally Self-Critical was dropped, with much of its content merged into Earn Trust. Adding, subtracting, and modifying your principles in response to change or deeper understanding is a sign that you’re probably doing things right.

Strong leadership principles represent a company’s vision and enable good and fast decisions throughout the company. Codifying those principles is a huge step forward, as we’ve seen, but there is another step that is equally important: to embed them into every one of your company’s core processes, including hiring, performance management, planning, operating cadence, and career development.
