# Introduction to Part Two

Working Backwards
## ** Introduction to Part Two**

Now we come to the application—the proof that the elements that go into* being Amazonian* produce results. In 2015 Jeff wrote, “We want to be a large company that’s also an invention machine. We want to combine the extraordinary customer-serving capabilities that are enabled by size with the speed of movement, nimbleness, and risk-acceptance mentality normally associated with entrepreneurial start-ups.”[1](text00025.html#note27a) And as we’ll see, there is a direct link between careful observation of the practices enumerated in part one and the impressive successes and breakthroughs at Amazon, including services like Amazon Prime and Prime Video, hardware like Kindle and Alexa (Kindle is also a service), practices like Bar Raiser hiring and Working Backwards, and businesses like Amazon Web Services and Amazon Echo and Alexa.

Of course, Jeff also wrote in that same shareholder letter, “I believe we are the best place in the world to fail (we have plenty of practice!), and failure and invention are inseparable twins. To invent you have to experiment, and if you know in advance that it’s going to work, it’s not an experiment. Most large organizations embrace the idea of invention, but are not willing to suffer the string of failed experiments necessary to get there.” Thus for Amazon, its less successful inventions, such as Fire Phone, are valuable. The same is true of the off-target early iterations of later successes, such as Amazon Unbox, which evolved into Prime Video, and Amazon Auctions and zShops, which developed into Amazon Marketplace. These “failures” are important parts of the company’s story, both as precursors to later successes and as evidence that experimentation is happening.

Naturally, if you don’t have the budget to invent, don’t do it. But, even with a limited budget, you can be successful over time if your approach is patient and frugal.* Being Amazonian* means approaching invention with long-term thinking and customer obsession, ensuring that the Leadership Principles guide the way, and deploying the practices to drive execution. “Long-term thinking levers our existing abilities and lets us do new things we couldn’t otherwise contemplate,” Jeff wrote. “Long-term orientation interacts well with customer obsession. If we can identify a customer need and if we can further develop conviction that that need is meaningful and durable, our approach permits us to work patiently for multiple years to deliver a solution.”[2](text00025.html#note28a) Key word: patiently. Many companies will give up on an initiative if it does not produce the kind of returns they are looking for within a handful of years. Amazon will stick with it for five, six, seven years—all the while keeping the investment manageable, constantly learning and improving—until it gains momentum and acceptance.

The other key is frugality. You can’t afford to pursue inventions for very long if you spend your money on things that don’t lead to a better customer experience, like trade show booths, big teams, and splashy marketing campaigns. Amazon Music and Prime Video are examples of how we kept our investment manageable for many years by being frugal: keeping the team small, staying focused on improving the customer experience, limiting our marketing spend, and managing the P&L carefully. Once we had a clear product plan and vision for how these products could become billion-dollar businesses that would delight tens, even hundreds of millions of consumers, we invested big. Patience and carefully managed investment over many years can pay off greatly.

Invention is not the solution to every problem. For instance, when Amazon started, the company did not create its own computer hardware. On the flip side, when we were planning our e-book business, we decided to get into the hardware game with Kindle. The reason: invention works well where differentiation matters. In the company’s early days, the hardware that powered Amazon’s data centers was not the point of differentiation with the customer—creating a compelling book-buying online experience was. Whereas with Kindle, as we will describe in chapter seven, others were selling e-books, so there was real value in owning and controlling the creation of an outstanding device for our customers to read them on. Differentiation with customers is often one of the key reasons to invent.

And what was true yesterday may not be true today. In fact, today Amazon does make some computer hardware to power its data centers. That’s because this special-purpose hardware designed for AWS’s data centers reduces costs and increases reliability in a nontrivial way. These benefits can be passed on to AWS customers in the form of meaningful price decreases and services that offer higher reliability.

When we have invented, our long-term, patient approach—driven by customer need—has been fundamentally different from the more conventional “skills-forward” approach to invention, in which a company looks for new business opportunities that neatly fit with its existing skills and competencies. While this approach can be rewarding, there is a fundamental problem with it: the company will never be driven to master new skills and develop new competencies, hire new kinds of leaders, or create different types of organizations. Amazon’s Working Backwards process—starting with customer needs, not corporate needs or competencies—often demands that, in Jeff’s words, we “exercise new muscles, never mind how uncomfortable and awkward-feeling those first steps might be.”

In this part of the book, we look at four key examples of successful Amazonian invention—Kindle, Amazon Prime, Prime Video, and Amazon Web Services (AWS)—but there are many others we could highlight and haven’t mentioned, such as Fulfillment by Amazon, Amazon Echo and Alexa, and Kindle Direct Publishing.

We won’t dedicate a full chapter to one of the failures, but it’s worth mentioning one here in brief. The Amazon Fire Phone is an example of a well-executed process that produced, well, a dud. The launch of the Fire Phone was one of the largest new product initiatives the company had undertaken. The phone’s primary differentiator was a feature called “dynamic perspective,” a 3D effect produced by four cameras within the phone, along with a positioning gyroscope. More than a thousand people worked on the many elements required to create the phone’s 3D capability and a number of smaller innovations, as well as the more standard features and functions that would affect the customer experience. Some 30 apps were involved, for one-touch customer service, free photo storage in the Amazon cloud, a clock, a calendar, a music player, Kindle, and on and on.

Fire Phone launched in June 2014. In August 2015, it was discontinued. What happened?

First, even with the PR/FAQ process, the Fire Phone did not solve a sufficiently important customer problem or create a notably wonderful customer experience. I (Bill) remember wondering, when I first learned about the project in 2012, why anybody would want a 3D effect on their phone, cool though it was. Here’s a snippet from the press release the day it launched:

SEATTLE—(BUSINESS WIRE)—Jun. 18, 2014—(NASDAQ: AMZN)—Amazon today unveiled Fire, the first smartphone designed by Amazon. Fire is the only smartphone with Dynamic Perspective and Firefly, two new breakthrough technologies that allow you to see and interact with the world through a whole new lens. Dynamic Perspective uses a new sensor system to respond to the way you hold, view, and move Fire, enabling experiences not possible on other smartphones. Firefly quickly recognizes things in the real world—web and email addresses, phone numbers, QR and bar codes, movies, music, and millions of products, and lets you take action in seconds—all with the simple press of the Firefly button.[3](text00025.html#note29a)

Second, the phone sold at a premium price. One of Amazon’s guiding principles is Frugality, and we had demonstrated to the world that we were the cost-effective, break-the-business-model company. To customers, the core principle simply meant low prices. Now we were offering a phone for $200, the same price as the iPhone, and it required a two-year commitment with a mobile carrier. ($200 sounds cheap now, but back then mobile phones were subsidized and prices were a lot lower.) We dropped the price to $99 and then offered it for free. It didn’t matter. Nobody wanted it.

Finally, the Fire Phone came late to market and with only a single carrier, AT&T. By that time, iPhone service was available through four carriers that all offered a number of other brands as well. There was a lot of competition on the shelf and in the air.

If we had offered the Fire Phone at a lower price point than the iPhone, with most of the features and a commitment to Prime, would that have made the difference? Possibly.

The point of the story, however, is that the process improves your odds of success but by no means guarantees it. Jeff himself was deeply involved in the development of the Fire Phone. He was effectively one of the authors of the PR/FAQ, along with project leaders Ian Freed and Cameron Janes. He and the team either believed or convinced themselves that they were creating a phone customers would love, but they were wrong. Even the best process can only improve the quality of your decision-making; no process will make the decision for you.

Indeed, the failure of the Fire Phone did not cause Jeff to question the process that created it. “We all know that if you swing for the fences,” he wrote, “you’re going to strike out a lot, but you’re also going to hit some home runs.” Unlike baseball, where a home run can bring in no more than four runs, a big business hit can score an almost infinite number of runs. What’s crucial to understand is that a small number of very big winners can pay for a large number of experiments that fail or succeed only modestly.

In an interview after the Fire Phone was withdrawn, Jeff was asked about its failure and answered, “If you think that’s a big failure, we’re working on much bigger failures right now—and I am not kidding.”[4](text00025.html#note30a) The magnitude of your inventions, and therefore your mistakes, needs to grow in lockstep with the growth of your organization. If it doesn’t, your inventions will likely not be big enough to move the needle.

As a company grows larger, it can become more difficult to keep the invention machine humming, and one impediment is “one-size-fits-all” decision-making. In the same 2015 shareholder letter, Jeff wrote, “Some decisions are consequential and irreversible or nearly irreversible—one-way doors—and these decisions must be made methodically, carefully, slowly, with great deliberation and consultation. If you walk through and don’t like what you see on the other side, you can’t get back to where you were before. We can call these Type 1 decisions. But most decisions aren’t like that—they are changeable, reversible—they’re two-way doors. If you’ve made a suboptimal Type 2 decision, you don’t have to live with the consequences for that long. You can reopen the door and go back through. Type 2 decisions can and should be made quickly by high judgment individuals or small groups.” Prime was a two-way door decision. If Prime’s particular combination of subscription, free shipping, and quick delivery had not worked, we’d have kept tinkering with the formula until we got it right. In fact, Prime was not our first go at solving the problem—it was preceded by another two-way door decision, Super Saver Shipping, which eventually morphed into Prime. The Fire Phone, on the other hand, was more of a one-way door decision: upon withdrawing it from the market, Amazon did not turn around and say, “Okay, that happened, now let’s try another phone.”

Big companies tend to develop a decision-making process that is designed to manage one-way door decisions, precisely because poor decisions can lead to big problems, even disaster. The process is typically slow, cumbersome, and riddled with risk aversion. This process tends to become the dominant one in large companies, and it is routinely, almost thoughtlessly, applied to two-way door decisions. The result is reduced speed, impaired idea generation, stifled innovation, and longer development cycles.

That’s why Amazon focuses on the speed of movement, nimbleness, and a risk-acceptance mentality associated with a Day One startup—all the while adhering to the highest standards. This approach has been part of* being Amazonian* since the early days of the company. In 1999 Jeff wrote, “We must be committed to constant improvement, experimentation, and innovation in every initiative. We love to be pioneers, it’s in the DNA of the company, and it’s a good thing, too, because we’ll need that pioneering spirit to succeed.”[5](text00025.html#note31a)
