# 10. AWS

Working Backwards
## ** 10**

## ** AWS**

* A new class of customers. The origins of AWS in data sharing with affiliates. Colin gets “the call” from Jeff, who comes on board. Eight people attend the first software developer conference. How the Invent and Simplify leadership principle enabled Amazon to become the leader in web services. How we used the Working Backwards process to create AWS.*

* * *

* Scene: Colin’s office. His phone rings. Caller ID displays “Jeff Bezos.”*

COLIN: Hi, Jeff.

JEFF: Hi, Colin. I’m getting up to speed on what we are doing with web services and your name came up. Can you tell me what you are doing, if anything, with web services?

COLIN: Sure. It’s probably easiest to show you. When is a good time for you?

JEFF: How about now?

COLIN* (while canceling the next two meetings and tucking his laptop under his arm)* : Now is great. I’ll be right down.

As we’ve already seen, in the early 2000s, the transformation from physical media to digital media posed an existential threat to Amazon’s business. Roughly 75 percent of Amazon’s business at that time consisted of selling physical books, CDs, and DVDs to customers. We had to invent or risk becoming an irrelevant has-been in media sales. Also, while hugely successful, Amazon Prime was essentially an extension (albeit a very large one) of our existing online physical media retail business.

Unlike Digital or Prime, however, Amazon Web Services had nothing to do with the core business. The term “cloud computing”—the on-demand delivery of IT resources such as computing power and data storage over the internet with pay-as-you-go pricing without having to buy, own, and maintain physical data centers and servers[1](text00025.html#note49a) —wasn’t widely used in the early 2000s, and Amazon was likely not on many people’s list of companies that were well positioned to offer it. Further, it involved an entirely new class of customer for Amazon: software developers.

In this chapter we will not provide a comprehensive story about the origins and history of AWS. That subject could fill a whole book in itself. Instead, we will attempt to answer the following two questions, which can help you incorporate key elements of* being Amazonian* into your organization:
1. What elements of* being Amazonian* enabled Amazon to move into this completely separate line of business?
1. Why was Amazon able to master cloud computing well before its potential competitors, including entrenched companies with large businesses to protect and well-capitalized web-based tech companies?

The answers to both questions come down to single-threaded teams ruthlessly iterating with the Working Backwards process, and obsessing over the customer experience, in order to discover the fundamental needs of the software developer in the new paradigm of cloud computing.

### ** Influences**

#### Web Services Proof of Concept

It was 2001, and I (Colin) was managing the affiliates business called Amazon Associates. This program allowed third parties, commonly referred to as affiliates, to place links to Amazon products on their websites. For example, as we mentioned before, a site about mountain climbing might include a curated list of recommended mountain climbing books with links to Amazon. When a visitor clicked on one of the links on the affiliate website, they were taken to the book detail page on the Amazon site. If the visitor bought a product with Amazon, the owner of the affiliate website would earn a referral fee. Up until this point, affiliates could choose which Amazon products they wanted to feature along with a few parameters to determine how they would be displayed on their website, similar to how an ad server works today. The program was wildly popular. Over the four years I was involved with the program, the number of affiliates grew from 30,000 to roughly one million. But, as Jeff often mentions, customers are divinely discontented, and “yesterday’s ‘wow’ quickly becomes today’s ‘ordinary.’”[2](text00025.html#note50a) And we simply didn’t have enough design resources to seamlessly integrate Amazon products into each of our affiliate’s websites.

That’s when we took a step back, placed ourselves in our affiliates’ shoes, and looked at the problem from their perspective. We’d been operating on the correct assumption that the big attraction of the program for affiliates was the Amazon products themselves, but in so doing we’d overlooked their desire to have choices around the look and feel of the display—for instance, the font size, color palette, or image size. Turns out they didn’t want to settle for the “best available” Amazon format.

So, in March 2002, we decided to take a chance and launch an experimental feature that changed the way we shared information with the affiliates. Instead of receiving a fully formed product display, the affiliates could choose to receive the product data in a text format called XML. The affiliates would then take that XML product data and write their own software code to incorporate it into their websites according to their own design standards. The goal was for us to get out of the design business so they could innovate without us holding them back.

This feature was novel and risky in two ways. First, since we began the Associates Program, our core customer had been the owner of a website. To be an affiliate, it was not necessary to be a software developer, or even to be able to understand or write basic computer code. That meant we had to keep things very simple. We would generate the code for the affiliate. Just a few mouse clicks were all that was needed to be up and running. No software programming was necessary.

This new feature was different. It was aimed at a technical audience, affiliates who had software developers on their teams who knew how to write code that transforms the product data XML into something that looks good on their website. We had to create new elements such as user manuals, technical specifications, and sample code all rolled into a software developer kit (SDK) to show them how the system worked. We also created a discussion board where developers could post details about their experience with the services and ask each other questions. We didn’t really know how our affiliates would react to this more complicated but also more powerful and flexible feature.

The second way this feature was novel, and even controversial, was that it was a lot more than just a tool that allowed website owners to design their own links to Amazon products. As the name suggests, the product data XML service contained rich information about Amazon products, such as “customers who bought this product also bought X.” We had painstakingly built our catalog of tens of millions of products, which also contained valuable data about consumer behavior toward those products, and many in the company viewed this catalog as a competitive asset not to be shared. On the Associates team, however, we felt that the benefits of letting hundreds of thousands of developers build commerce solutions on top of this data outweighed the potential risks. We did place some restrictions on what the affiliate could do with the data in an attempt to mitigate our risk. They could only use it for selling Amazon products, and they couldn’t store the data permanently. Beyond that, although we were excited to see the creative ways in which affiliates would use this data, no amount of analysis could predict what they would do.

Here’s another example of where a single-threaded leader and team helps. I was accountable for the financial performance and overall health of the affiliates business. Our team had virtually all the resources required to launch this feature: we had software engineers and product managers to build the feature; and we had our own customer service representatives armed with specialized knowledge and tools to field questions from affiliates. We knew our customers well, had conviction that the experiment was worth doing, and were willing to be misunderstood as we tried something new. We also had a rollback plan in the unlikely event that the experiment failed.

We decided to launch the feature and see what happened. We issued no press release and made no big public announcement. We simply sent an email to our affiliates that explained the new feature and its potential benefits and pointed them to the SDK we had created for them. We made it clear that the feature wasn’t for everyone. They’d have to write some code to get it to work for them.

Whenever we sent an email like this one to our affiliates, I made it a habit to monitor how they responded. I would look at a dashboard that displayed such information as how many people had read the email, how many had clicked on the links in the email, and how many incremental referral fees were generated as a result of the email. I’d also check in with our customer service group for any anecdotal data they might have collected about contacts with affiliates, and I’d also read the comments and questions on the discussion board. I must admit, I had been a little anxious after hitting the proverbial send button for this particular email—the list of possible outcomes ranged from promising to a very long day reacting to bad news. That anxiety turned into excitement very quickly. Literally hours after releasing this feature, I knew that we were onto something big and that our experiment would far exceed our expectations. On the discussion boards, affiliates were posting links to web pages they had created with this new service along with the code they used to do it. They were proud of what they had created and wanted to share it with others. They were enthusiastically answering questions posted by other affiliates, even before we could respond. And they immediately started suggesting new features that would make the service even better.

Over the next several days I compiled a list of websites that were using the service in surprising and innovative ways. One developer created an addictive game where visitors would race against the clock and each other to see how fast they could name the author, artist, or movie based on the cover art flashed on the screen. Another developer made it easy for people to create a web page containing a virtual bookshelf of their personal media collections. Finally, there were two examples that essentially tried to re-create the shopping experience of Amazon but with completely different user interfaces than that found on the Amazon site. The first case we informally called Amazon Lite. It was a simple, stripped-down, text-heavy version of the site. Not flashy, but it worked especially well on small screens and feature phones. (The first iPhone was still five years out in the future.) The second case we labeled Amazon Graph, and it looked nothing like a website. It was an app that displayed a network graph with nodes and lines connecting the nodes. Each node represented a single product, and the lines pointed to other products based on our similarities data. It was a fascinating representation of our product catalog. These types of web applications simply could not have been created before we released this feature.

And then I got “the call” mentioned at the top of the chapter, when Jeff summoned me to his office. I grabbed my laptop and hurried out of my office in the 1930s Art Deco building that used to be part of the Marine Hospital Service, descended one flight of stairs, and went into Jeff’s office. We sat around a conference table next to his door desk where I briefly explained the new feature. I told him the most interesting insight was not what Amazon was doing with web services; rather, it was what* our affiliates* were doing with them. I proceeded to show him some of the more interesting sites and applications, including some of the ones mentioned above, along with numbers showing the traffic and sales generated by them.

I told Jeff that every day since the launch, software developers were creating applications that used the features in ways we had never imagined.

After we finished the virtual tour, Jeff commented that this adoption rate and level of innovation from a single feature was unusual and that we needed to double down on our activities in this area. I responded that we were looking at ways to roll it out to a wider audience with a much richer feature set in July, three months away. From that day, Jeff was an avid supporter.

Jeff was not the only one who saw promise in what we were doing. Asking for additional software engineers to work on your project at Amazon is akin to looking for loose change someone left in a vending machine. It almost never happens. But when I approached Neil Roseman, my manager, to see whether anyone was available, he immediately got back to me and said that a group headed by Rob Frederick had just finished a project called Amazon Anywhere, which used XML to enable Amazon commerce on mobile devices. Rob and his team were just as passionate about web services as we were and enthusiastically joined the effort. Sarah Spillman headed up the product management team. We also had quite a bit of support from Rick Dalzell, the CIO, and a senior technologist and VP, Al Vermeulen, who would go on to play an instrumental role in designing and building many of the key components of AWS. Rob and Sarah rolled up their sleeves and led the technology and business teams in the race to launch the next full-featured version. Al and Rick helped spread the news not only within Amazon but also among several influential early adopters in the software industry.

The next three months were a blur. We felt we were pioneers creating something truly special for our new customers, the software development community.

Since we did not have much experience creating programs for software developers, we sought in-person feedback from heavy users of the service. We decided to host an Amazon software developer conference in our Seattle headquarters. The first one attracted a grand total of eight people. We flew two of them in from Europe. I discovered, just a week before the conference, that one of the European attendees was a teenager. I had to check with our legal department if that was okay—fortunately we didn’t need permission from his parents, and he was able to join us at the conference.

We worked out the logistics and set up a full day of sessions. Tim O’Reilly and Rael Dornfest from the O’Reilly Media, who were both avid supporters of the web services movement and taught us a lot about this new field, were there too. Another attendee was an avid customer who happened to live in Seattle. His name was Jeff Barr. He commented:

The attendees were outnumbered by the Amazon employees. We sat and listened as the speakers talked about their plans to build on their success and to expand their web service offering over time. One speaker (it may have been Colin Bryar but I am not sure) looked to the future and said that they would be looking around the company for other services to expose in the future.

This was the proverbial light-bulb moment for me! It was obvious that they were thinking about developers, platforms, and APIs and I wanted to be a part of it.[3](text00025.html#note51a)

Jeff Barr joined Amazon a few weeks later and is still with the company, serving as VP and chief evangelist for AWS.

For those in attendance, the final session of the day was probably the most memorable—a Q&A with Jeff Bezos. Needless to say, many of those eight attendees were thrilled and surprised at the chance for this intimate meeting with Jeff, as well as by the depth of his knowledge about the service. In his 2006 shareholder letter, Jeff made his reasons clear:

Like any company, we have a corporate culture formed not only by our intentions but also as a result of our history. For Amazon, that history is fairly fresh and, fortunately, it includes several examples of tiny seeds growing into big trees. We have many people at our company who have watched multiple $10 million seeds turn into billion dollar businesses. That first-hand experience and the culture that has grown up around those successes is, in my opinion, a big part of why we can start businesses from scratch. The culture demands that these new businesses be high potential and that they be innovative and differentiated, but it does not demand that they be large on the day that they are born.

I remember how excited we were in 1996 as we crossed $10 million in book sales. It wasn’t hard to be excited—we had grown to $10 million from zero. Today, when a new business inside Amazon grows to $10 million, the overall company is growing from $10 billion to $10.01 billion. It would be easy for the senior executives who run our established billion dollar businesses to scoff. But they don’t. They watch the growth rates of the emerging businesses and send emails of congratulations. That’s pretty cool, and we’re proud it’s a part of our culture.[4](text00025.html#note52a)

I opened this chapter with a question: How was it that Amazon got to cloud computing first and became the largest provider of web services? Jeff provides the answer in his letter: it is because of Amazon’s innovative spirit combined with the patience that comes with long-term thinking. Even when the business was brand-new and very small, we realized it had high potential, that it was an area where we could innovate and differentiate, and we had the patience to stick with it.

In July 2002, we launched the very first version of Amazon Web Services. If the product data XML we had sent to affiliates a few months earlier was the beta, AWS was the 1.0. It included some search and shopping capabilities and a full software development kit, and it was available to anyone, not just affiliates. Also, it was still free. For this one, we did issue a press release, in which Jeff said:

We’re putting out a welcome mat for developers—this is an important beginning and new direction for us. . . . Developers can now incorporate Amazon.com content and features directly onto their own websites. We can’t wait to see how they’re going to surprise us.[5](text00025.html#note53a)

Up until this point Amazon had two sets of customers—buyers and sellers. Now we had a new customer set—the software developer.

After the launch, as we monitored the response, we had another surprise. Some of our biggest customers were not affiliates and not outsiders of any kind. They were Amazon software engineers. They found Amazon Web Services easier to use than some of our existing internal software tools they had been working with to build amazon.com. At this point there was little doubt that web services were going to become a new way of building things. We just didn’t know how big it could be or how quickly developers would adopt it. Within a year, we had a pretty good idea—over 25,000 developers enrolled in the program[6](text00025.html#note54a) and were constantly surprising us with what they built.

Though this program was called Amazon Web Services, it bears little resemblance to today’s AWS. In fact, the service we launched in 2002 was renamed the Amazon Product API and had a significant limitation—it had to be used to market Amazon products and therefore was solely focused on improving the Amazon retail ecosystem.

There were other projects that also helped us realize how big web services could be. Also in 2001, we embarked on a project called the “3-Ring Binder,” which was an attempt to create and document a set of APIs that would allow partners to quickly add their product selection to the Amazon site and to create websites powered by Amazon’s technology, but at their own URLs, under their control. This project eventually allowed us to create websites for partners such as Target and other retailers. Additionally, we developed a program called Seller Central, which provided web services that Amazon’s third-party sellers could use to manage their businesses. The Amazon Associates Product API, Amazon Anywhere, the 3-Ring Binder, and Seller Central all reinforced our hypothesis that a seismic shift was happening in the way software was built.

In the summer of 2003, just as Web Services was taking off, I lost my job. Or rather, I switched to a different job. As I mentioned in the introduction, Jeff asked if I would like to become his technical advisor—his shadow—an offer I could not refuse. Andy Jassy had been Jeff’s technical advisor for the previous 18 months and was ready for a new role. He could have taken virtually any job in the company, including a leadership role in any of its largest businesses. Fortunately for us, he decided to start and lead a new team that would build on our experiment. Andy and his team envisioned and created a much more robust set of products that would usher in the era of cloud computing and become the massive hit that AWS is today. While the explosive growth of AWS and its sophisticated suite of product offerings all came after I had moved on to other projects, it serves as a vivid example of* being Amazonian* .

It’s worth noting that we had competition. Several other companies were offering web services–based developer programs at the time. Like the Amazon Product API, their programs were intended to enhance their own ecosystem. For example, eBay’s developer API provided developers with tools to build applications to buy and sell products on eBay. Google had a search API, which launched the same week as Amazon Product API. Amazon had a second web services program that Marketplace sellers could use to manage the products they sold on Amazon. These programs generated quite a bit of buzz in the developer community.

The one thing all these programs had in common was that their ultimate goal was to have their parties build new software that would in some way accrue benefit to their core business—such as Amazon affiliate sales, more eBay transactions, more Google searches, and more Amazon Marketplace seller transactions. All of us, leaders and developers from these companies, were looking at similar data and trends. We ran into each other at developer conferences, participated on panels together, and shared customers who were using our developer programs. We were all swimming in the same primordial soup. Yet it was Amazon who took the first step in web services and said, “Why don’t we build a set of tools that any developer can use to build anything they want, even if it has nothing to do with our core business?” As mentioned earlier, it was largely because of the Amazon focus on invention. Part of the Invent and Simplify leadership principle states, “As we do new things, we accept that we may be misunderstood for long periods of time.” Despite skeptics saying Amazon didn’t belong in this space, we’d experienced firsthand the enthusiasm of the developer community, and we doubled down on that enthusiasm.

There were two additional factors that influenced the decision to make a bet on web services.

#### The Primitives Are Known, They Just Haven’t Been Exposed as Web Services

For several decades, well-established hardware and software companies had built and sold capable solutions for a well-known set of problems inherent in building commercial software—storage (databases used to save and retrieve data), message queueing, and notifications (the latter two are different methods computer processes use to communicate with one another). If a software developer needed to implement one of these building blocks, they would have to buy a software license that would typically incur a nontrivial one-time cost plus yearly maintenance fees for however long the product was in use. Moreover, they would either have to buy hardware and run it in their own data center or pay a partner to do it.

We didn’t have to invent these building blocks—or “primitives” as they have been called—we just had to figure out how to offer them in the cloud as a web service. For instance, if you want to use Amazon’s S3 storage service, all you need to do is sign up for a free account and provide a credit card. After a few lines of code to set up your own storage area (called provisioning), you can start storing and retrieving data. You then pay only for what you use, which means there is no time-consuming vendor-selection process and no cost negotiation (the list prices of many corporate software licenses were just the starting point in a negotiation). And you don’t have to secure computers and a data center to run your new database. The cloud provider, in this case Amazon, handles all that.

I kept my eye on these developments even as I shifted to being Jeff’s shadow. Jeff and I attended an O’Reilly Emerging Technology conference shortly after I moved jobs, and we went to a panel featuring Stewart Butterfield, who co-founded Flickr, the popular photo-sharing site, and later Slack. Someone asked Stewart to describe a typical day at Flickr. His answer was surprising. He said that about half the day was probably the same as it was for many of the people in the audience—scrambling to keep their technology platform one step ahead of the rapid growth of their business. They worked on scaling their databases, web servers, software, and hardware. Stewart said they did not spend as much time as he would like on innovating things that were unique to Flickr.

After the meeting, Jeff and I had a brief chat about Stewart’s comments. We’d both noticed the same thing—a phenomenon that Amazon would later refer to as “undifferentiated heavy lifting,” that is, the tasks that we could do for companies that would enable them to focus on what made them unique. This was an opportunity.

#### Server-Side Was Easy for Us and Hard for Most Everyone Else

Another factor that influenced our decision to offer a broader set of services was that, in building and operating one of the world’s largest websites, we had acquired a core competency only a few companies could match. We had the capability to store massive amounts of data, perform computations on that data, and then quickly and reliably deliver the results to end users, be they humans or computers.

Suppose, for example, that you want to build a service that stores millions of photos to be searched and queried by millions of customers. In 2002, that would have been a reasonably large but very doable project for Amazon. That pretty much describes, in fact, our Search Inside the Book capability. For most companies, however, such a project would have been cost and time prohibitive. But it was clear that more and more companies would develop or acquire these capabilities, and they eventually would become an undifferentiated commodity.

That is exactly what happened. Today, building the capability to store and retrieve millions of photos could well be a homework assignment for a college student taking a computer science class. In several of the Working Backwards documents for the early AWS products, the PR/FAQ stated that we wanted the student in a dorm room to have access to the same world-class computing infrastructure as any Amazon software engineer. That powerful metaphor in the PR/FAQ document really helped crystallize the thoughts and ideas of the AWS product development teams.

There were a number of factors that influenced Amazon’s decision to start the foray into web services that would ultimately become AWS. We had several proofs of concept in the Amazon Product API and the Amazon Seller API demonstrating that the area was worthy of attention. It was simply a better way to build software than the traditional methods used at that time. There was a relatively clear roadmap on what was needed since the software building blocks were known, but hadn’t yet been offered as web services. We also knew our unique capabilities would not be unique for very long, which provided a sense of urgency. (The first company to offer a robust set of general-purpose web services wouldn’t be guaranteed to win in the long run, but the head start sure would help.)

That sense of urgency is codified in Amazon’s Bias for Action leadership principle. It states, “Speed matters in business. Many decisions and actions are reversible and do not need extensive study. We value calculated risk-taking.” It wasn’t unusual for a senior leader like Andy Jassy to choose to start a new business from scratch rather than to assume leadership of an established business. Just as it wasn’t unusual for Steve Kessel and Bill to move from Amazon’s then-largest business to one of its smallest, or for Colin and team to take a chance with releasing a new but controversial web service.

We also had some luck. In the 2015 shareholder letter, Jeff states, “Luck plays an outsized role in every endeavor, and I can assure you we’ve had a bountiful supply.”[7](text00025.html#note55a) We were lucky that it took much longer than we expected for the pre-cloud incumbents or web tech companies to mobilize and start offering their own set of cloud services. By the time they realized the potential of cloud computing, Amazon had a several-year head start.

### ** AWS as It Started**

So what happened next? Basically, the first part of the race consisted of many months of iterating on the Working Backwards PR/FAQ process and going through the Bar Raiser process one candidate at a time as fast as we could to start building out the teams. As usual, we avoided shortcuts. It’s also notable that only two out of the first set of about a half-dozen services were runaway successes—Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service) and Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud). Jeff and I would meet with Andy and the leaders of these teams every two weeks, sometimes more often. There was also a large team that was building out the infrastructure that all these services would use. This infrastructure consisted of components such as metering, billing, reporting, and other shared functions.

Though the initial roadmap of primitives was relatively straightforward, what wasn’t so easy was figuring out how to build them so that they could operate on a scale several orders of magnitude greater than what we were doing for the Amazon retail business. There were many thorny technical issues and some truly astounding engineering work done by the teams to solve them. A full account is outside the scope of this book, but to give you an idea, the following is a description of one key issue we discussed and refined.

The Working Backwards process is all about starting from the customer perspective and following a step-by-step process where you question assumptions relentlessly until you have a complete understanding of what you want to build. It’s about seeking truth. Sometimes the Working Backwards process can uncover some surprising truths. Some companies, in a rush to get a project to market, ignore that truth and keep building according to the original plan. In their attachment to the modest gains of that plan, they motivate the team to pursue it aggressively, only to realize much later that there was a much bigger gain to be had if they’d taken the time to question their own assumptions. The cost of changing course in the PR/FAQ writing stage is much lower than after you’ve launched and have an operating business to manage. The Working Backwards process tends to save you from the expensive proposition of making a significant course change after you’ve launched your product. One example that illustrates this point is an issue that came up with S3.

In the FAQ there was a simple question that read something like, “How much does S3 cost?” One of the first versions of the answer was that S3 would be a tiered monthly subscription service based on average storage use, with a possible free tier for small amounts of data. Customers would choose a monthly subscription rate based on how much data they typically needed to store—Simple Storage Service with simple pricing. We hadn’t worked out the exact details of the tiers and the prices for each tier, but you don’t have to do that in early iterations of the Working Backwards process. The engineering team was ready to move on to the next question.

Except that day we never got to the next question. We kept discussing this question. We really did not know how developers would use S3 when it launched. Would they store mostly large objects with low retrieval rates? Small objects with high retrieval rates? How often would updates happen versus reads? How many customers would need simple storage (can easily be re-created, stored in only one location, not a big deal if you lose it) and how many would need complex storage (bank records, stored in multiple locations, a very big deal if you lose it)? All those factors were unknown yet could meaningfully impact our costs. Since we didn’t know how developers would use S3, was there a way to structure our pricing so that no matter how it was used, we could ensure that it would be affordable to our customers and to Amazon?

Thus, the discussion moved away from a tiered subscription pricing strategy and toward a cost-following strategy. “Cost following” means that your pricing model is driven primarily by your costs, which are then passed on to your customer. This is what construction companies use, because building your customer’s gazebo out of redwood will cost you a lot more than building it out of pine. If we were to use a cost-following strategy, we’d be sacrificing the simplicity of subscription pricing, but both our customers and Amazon would benefit. With cost following, whatever the developer did with S3, they would use it in a way that would meet their requirements, and they would strive to minimize their cost and, therefore, our cost too. There would be no gaming of the system, and we wouldn’t have to estimate how the mythical average customer would use S3 to set our prices.[*](text00024.html#foot4a)

Would the most important cost drivers for S3 be the cost of storing data on the disk? The bandwidth costs of moving the data? The number of transactions? Electrical power? We finally settled on storage and bandwidth. As we discovered after S3 launched, our prediction was a little off. As Werner Vogels, the CTO of AWS, puts it,

An example in the early days where we did not know the resources required to serve certain usage patterns was with S3: We had assumed that the storage and bandwidth were the resources we should charge for; after running for a while, we realized that the number of requests was an equally important resource. If customers have many tiny files, then storage and bandwidth don’t amount to much even if they are making millions of requests. We had to adjust our model to account for all the dimensions of resource usage so that AWS could be a sustainable business.[8](text00025.html#note56a)

However, crucially, our decision to use the cost-following strategy allowed us to correct our mistake and adjust our pricing relatively easily. Having already determined in our PR/FAQ process what all the possible cost drivers for the service would be, we could now adjust our pricing to conform to what they actually were. The adjustment would have been much larger and more costly if we’d stayed with our original idea of subscription pricing.

Amazon was just starting to use the Working Backwards process in those days when we were developing this early version of AWS. And many teams were frustrated by how slow it was to do things this way. The software engineers in the PR/FAQ meeting where we discussed pricing were getting antsy. One of them pulled me aside afterward and said, “We’re software engineers, not pricing specialists with MBAs. We want to write software, not more Word documents.” Painstakingly following the Working Backwards process meant we didn’t even get to the rest of the PR/FAQ document in that meeting. And it meant the engineers now had to do a bunch of research, testing, and measurement on the relative costs of the service before the next meeting. I asked them to trust the process even though it seemed painful in the moment.

Jeff was insistent that we follow the process until we uncovered the truth and were crystal clear on what we were trying to build. He said that with the volume of scale we wanted to achieve, unless the service was built right with the initial release, teams would spend all their time keeping the system running and would not be able to develop any new features. And as it turns out, if you take a look at the first PR/FAQ for any of these services and compare them to the PR/FAQ at launch, they all evolved quite a bit for the better.

You can’t wind the clock back, replay the experiment, and see what would have happened if we had built and launched these services quickly without knowing some of the truths we discovered using Working Backwards. However, though there were still some post-launch maintenance issues and outages, the performance and rapid customer adoption speak for themselves. Based on my experience of going through the Working Backwards process with Jeff for well over a dozen different product teams across AWS, Digital, and other services, I can say confidently that the extra time we spent slowing down to uncover the necessary truths was ultimately a faster path to a large and successful business. The results speak for themselves. Amazon has large viable digital devices and media businesses. And, as mentioned in the introduction, AWS reached the $10 billion annual revenue milestone faster than Amazon the online retailer.

* * *

The launch of this early version of AWS is a particularly good case study of some of the fundamental Amazonian principles and processes. Bias for Action is an important leadership principle at Amazon, and with AWS we were certainly under time pressure to launch this product before our competitors did. But Bias for Action does not obviate the need for the painstaking aspects of the Working Backwards process. We did not allow ourselves to be so driven by what our competitors might do that we would launch a product without first having thought very carefully about how our customers would use it and benefit from it. To put it another way, Working Backwards was the process that enabled us to put into action the principle of Customer Obsession.

AWS today is much, much bigger and quite different from the version I worked on in the early 2000s, thanks to the visionary work of AWS CEO Andy Jassy and his team. But that is exactly what makes AWS so Amazonian. What began as a little experiment of sending out product data XML to our affiliates has grown into one of the major divisions of the Amazon business, one that brought in $35 billion in revenue in 2019. In recognizing the potential of this little seed to become the mighty oak of AWS, Jeff and others at Amazon embodied the Amazonian principles of Ownership, Invent and Simplify, and Think Big.
