# Acknowledgments

Colditz
## ** Acknowledgments**

This book would not have been possible without the help of many Amazonians past and present who were so generous with their time, allowing us to interview them or agreeing to review drafts of the manuscript. Without them we would have never been able to get all the facts and stories straight. Our thanks to Robin Andrulevich, Felix Anthony, Charlie Bell, Jason Child, Cem Sibay, Rick Dalzell, Ian Freed, Mike George, Dave Glick, Drew Herdener, Cameron Janes, Steve Kessel, Jason Kilar, Tom Killalea, Jonathan Leblang, Chris North, Laura Orvidas, Angie Quennell, Diego Piacentini, Kim Rachmeler, Vijay Ravindran, Neil Roseman, Dave Schappell, Jonathan Shakes, Joel Spiegel, Tom Szkutak, Sean Vegeler, John Vlastelica, Charlie Ward, Eugene Wei, and Gregg Zehr.

In addition to the list of Amazonians above, we would like to thank and acknowledge all the Amazonians who we worked with during our combined 27 years with the company. Working long, hard, and smart with all of you challenged and stretched us in ways that are hard to put in words. You all brought a level of smarts, passion, energy, and electricity that made Amazon so special.

We would like to offer a special thank-you to Jeff Bezos. The opportunity to work alongside Jeff was a transformative experience for both of us, not to mention a highlight of our careers.

We wish to acknowledge many others who read the manuscript and provided us with valuable feedback from an unbiased (non-Amazonian) perspective, including Joe Belfiore, Kristina Belfiore, Patti Brooke, Ed Clary, Roger Egan, Brian Fleming, Robert Goldbaum, Danny Limanseta, Jan Miksovsky, Sui Riu Quek, Brian Richter, Vikram Rupani, Marni Seneker, Marcus Swanepoel, John Tippett, and Jon Walton.

At St. Martin’s Press/Macmillan, we owe thanks to Alan Bradshaw and Ryan Masteller, who copyedited the book. Jonathan Bush created a cover design that captured the essence of our book. Assistant Editor Alice Pfeifer kept us on task and helped with innumerable details large and small. Associate Publisher Laura Clark understood our book from the first meeting and championed it every step of the way. Publicist Gabi Gantz helped us hone our pitch and bring the book out to the world. And Joe Brosnan and Mac Nicholas were crucial to all marketing efforts.

As first-time authors we were fortunate to have Tim Bartlett as our editor. Tim was always generous with his time. He gave us valuable guidance and challenged us to think about the book in new ways. He scoured every sentence in the manuscript to help us shape it into what you are reading today.

To our agent, Howard Yoon, who patiently coached us through the process, beginning with the new experience of writing our first book. As rookie authors, we made a lot of mistakes in the beginning of this project. Howard engaged with us in countless discussions and debates on the central theme and architecture of the book. He also served as our part-time writing instructor and guide to the world of publishing from the author side of the fence.

Thanks to Sean Silcoff for helping us with our book proposal. We didn’t even know we needed one when this project started. Many thanks to our writing partners John Butman, Matthew Sharpe, and Tom Schonhoff, who helped us transform our sometimes balky sentences, paragraphs, and chapters into what we hope is an enjoyable and cogent read. John, though you won’t get to see the final product, your wisdom and song are present throughout the book. Matt, thanks for jumping in at the last minute and helping us. We were amazed how quickly you got up to speed on the material and improved the book. Tom, thanks for the many, many patient hours you spent listening to our grandiose plans for each chapter and providing keen insights on how to turn them into a coherent message. You were always willing to roll up your sleeves and do whatever it took to produce a polished final product.

We would like to acknowledge our families. We love you all and you were a constant source of feedback and inspiration. To our children, Phoebe, Finn, Evan, and Maddox: your curiosity and insightful questions forced us to hone our message until it was concise and clear. And thanks for letting us use more than our fair share of the family computer at the expense of your* Minecraft* time. A special thanks to our parents, George and Cicely, Betty and Bill Sr. We would not be where we are today without your constant love and support along the way. You’ve been telling us since we were young that we could make a difference in the world and could do anything if we put our minds to it. Your support is one of the main reasons why it was not a big leap for us to attempt something as crazy as writing our first book thirty years into our careers. To Colin’s sister, Jessica, who sadly left this world all too soon. You are my hero. Your compassion, selflessness, and determination to help others in need are awe inspiring. The memory of your smile and laugh still brightens my day whenever I need an extra boost. And finally, to Colin’s wife, Sarah, and Bill’s wife, Lynn. Thanks for your love, encouragement, and all the sacrifices you made throughout this journey. We have been fortunate in many ways, none more so than having you as partners for life.
