# February 13

## Writing for Aquila, Priscilla, Apollos

The Holy Spirit is given in a twofold way. First in a concealed manner, then openly, as He was granted to Cornelius and Apollos—about whom we read in Acts 10, 18, and 19—who searched so diligently. And in this way every one of the saints feels the first fruits of the Spirit. For they are happy. Their thoughts and words about Christ are the best, and they take pleasure in Him. They love Him. To them the Word is a joy, and this does not happen without the Holy Spirit. Therefore every Christian has the Holy Spirit, no matter how great and how little that may be. The fact that he fears death, that he feels disturbances—this he has from the flesh. But the fact that he becomes a partaker of peace and quiet—this is not born in us. To love Christ, to confess Christ, and to take pleasure in Him—this does not happen without the Holy Spirit. To confess the faith, to bear the hatred of the world, to undergo exile and death—all this is proof of the Spirit.
—Martin Luther

## Aquila, Priscilla, Apollos

Aquila and his wife, Priscilla (Prisca), Jewish contemporaries of St. Paul, traveled widely. Because of persecution in Rome, they went to Corinth where they met the apostle Paul, who joined them in their trade of tentmaking (Acts 18:1–3). In turn, they joined Paul in his mission of proclaiming the Christian Gospel. The couple later traveled with Paul from Corinth to Ephesus (Acts 18:18), where the two of them established a home that served as hospitality headquarters for new converts to Christianity. Apollos was one of their numerous Jewish pupils in the faith. An eloquent man, Apollos, “being fervent in spirit… spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus” (Acts 18:25). He later traveled from Corinth to the province of Achaia, “showing by the Scriptures that the Christ was Jesus” (Acts 18:28). Aquila, Priscilla, and Apollos are all remembered and honored for their great missionary zeal.
