# February 10

## Writing for Silas, Fellow Worker of St. Peter and St.

Paul “And receiving,” it says, “a commandment from Paul, to Silas and Timothy, to come with all speed, they departed.” For though he was Paul, nevertheless he needed them. And with good reason God urges them to go into Macedonia, for there lay Greece shining brightly before them. See what zeal the rest of the disciples showed with respect to their leaders: not as it is now with us, who are separated and divided into great and small, some of us exalted, while others are envious. For this is the reason why some are envious, because we are puffed up, because we will not endure to be put upon a par with them. The reason why there is harmony in our physical body is because there is no puffing up, and there is no puffing up because the members stand in need of one another. The head has need of the feet. And God has made this to be the case with us, but, for all that, we will not endure it. Do you not hear how those outside the Church accuse us, say, “Necessity makes friendships”? The laity have need of us, and we exist for them. Since teacher or ruler would not exist if there were not persons to be taught, nor would he perform his part, for it would not be possible…. Nobody is able to do anything alone…. For instance, the poor need givers; the givers need receivers. “Consider how to encourage one another to love and good works” (Hebrews 10:24). This is why the assembly of the whole Church has more power. What each cannot do by himself alone, he is able to do when joined with the rest. Therefore it is absolutely necessary that the prayers are offered up, here, for the world, for the Church, from one end of the earth to the other, for peace, for those who are in adversities.
—John Chrysostom

## Silas, Fellow Worker of St. Peter and St. Paul

Silas, a leader in the Church at Jerusalem, was chosen by Paul (Acts 15:40) to accompany him on his second missionary journey from Antioch to Asia Minor and Macedonia. Silas, also known as Silvanus, was imprisoned with Paul in Philippi and experienced the riots in Thessalonica and Berea. After rejoining Paul in Corinth, Silas apparently remained there for an extended time. Sometime later he apparently joined the apostle Peter, likely serving as Peter’s secretary (1 Peter 5:12). Tradition says that Silas was the first bishop at Corinth.
