# February 16

## Writing for Philipp Melanchthon (birth), Confessor

I recognize the meagerness and insufficiency of my own writings. Although I am anxious to speak clearly and in proper language, yet it can happen—especially in so great a mountain of things and with so great need for brevity—that from time to time something may be said which is a little unclear or less than perfect. Therefore, I am not trying to evade the judgment of our churches. For I truly believe that they are the church of God, and with true godliness of mind I respect them, and I will not separate myself from them. I am submitting my words, my writings, and my actions to their judgment. I have often hoped that others who excel me in learning and judgment would share their counsel and their comparison of my statements about these matters and my forms of speaking. I have hoped that by their great authority they would produce such a work as would include in proper order the chief points of Christian doctrine. I would suggest that this ought to be of concern to godly and wise rulers, especially in such times of great confusion. But we see that the church is not ruled by the counsels of men. Therefore, I pray to God, the everlasting Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the sake of His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, whom He willed to be a sacrifice for us, both as a mediator and our suppliant. I pray that He would gather His church to Himself, rule and preserve it, guide the minds of those who teach and those who learn, aid their studies, and turn many to the truth and love of concord. Since Christ in His suffering prayed thus, let us join our prayers and our groanings to the prayer of our High Priest, who prayed, “Father, sanctify them in the truth; Your Word is truth.” [John 17:17]. Do not allow the light of the truth to be extinguished, that is, the light of Your Gospel. And He adds, “That they may all be one, even as We are one,” [v. 21] that they may first be joined with Us, and then be in harmony among themselves, and then work for the true peace of the church by performing their duties in a righteous manner.
—Philip Melanchthon

## Philipp Melanchthon (birth), Confessor

Philipp Melanchthon (1497–1560) was a brilliant student of the classics and a humanist scholar. In 1518, he was appointed to teach along with Martin Luther at the University of Wittenberg. At Luther’s urging, Melanchthon began teaching theology and Scripture in addition to his courses in classical studies. In April 1530, Emperor Charles V called an official meeting between the representatives of Lutheranism and Roman Catholicism, hoping to effect a meeting of minds between two opposing groups. Since Luther was at that time under papal excommunication and an imperial ban, Melanchthon was assigned the duty of being the chief Lutheran representative at this meeting. He is especially remembered and honored as the author of the Augsburg Confession, which was officially presented by the German princes to the emperor on June 25, 1530, as the defining document of Lutheranism within Christendom. Melanchthon died on April 19, 1560.
