# February 14

## Writing for Valentine, Martyr

For there are two loves from which proceed all desires, as different in quality as they are different in their sources. For the reasonable soul, which cannot exist without love, loves either God or the world. In the love of God there is no excess, but in the love of the world all is hurtful. And therefore we must cling inseparably to eternal treasures, but we must use temporal things like those who are just passing by and as sojourners hastening to return to our own land. All the good things of this world that meet us on our journey may be used to help us on our way, but must not become snares to detain us. Therefore the blessed apostle makes this proclamation, “The time is short: it remains that those who have wives be as though they had none; and those who weep, as though they wept not; and those who rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and those who buy, as though they possessed not; and those that use this world, as though they used it not. For the things of this world are passing away.” But the world attracts us with its appearance and abundance and variety, so it is not easy to turn away unless we love the beauty of the Creator in the visible things around us. For when He says, “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your mind, and with all your strength,” He wants us, in seeing the things around us, to grow stronger in our love for Him. And when He links the love of our neighbor to this command, He commands us to imitate His own goodness, that we should love what He loves and do what He does. For though we are “God’s field and God’s building,” and “neither is the one who plants anything, nor he who waters, but God who gives the increase,” yet in all things He requires our ministry and service and wants us to be the stewards of His gifts, that he who bears God’s image may do God’s will. For this reason, in the Lord’s Prayer we say most devoutly, “Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.” For what else do we ask for in these words but that God may subdue those whom He has not yet subdued, and as in heaven He makes the angels ministers of His will, so also on earth He may make men his servants? And in seeking this, we love God and also our neighbor; and the love within us has but one Object, since we desire the bond servant to serve and the Lord to rule.
—Leo the Great

## Valentine, Martyr

A physician and priest living in Rome during the rule of Emperor Claudius, Valentine became one of the noted martyrs of the third century. The commemoration of his death, which occurred in AD 270, became part of the calendar of remembrance in the Early Church of the West. Tradition suggests that on the day of his execution for his Christian faith, Valentine left a note of encouragement for a child of his jailer written on an irregularly shaped piece of paper. This greeting became a pattern for millions of written expressions of love and caring that now are the highlight of Valentine’s Day in many nations.
