# February 23

## Writing for Polycarp of Smyrna, Pastor and Martyr

As Polycarp entered the stadium, a voice from heaven came to him, saying, “Be strong, and show yourself a man, O Polycarp!” No one saw who it was that spoke to him, but our brothers who were there heard it. As he was brought forward, there was a great uproar in the crowd when they heard it was Polycarp. And when he came near, the proconsul asked him whether he was Polycarp. When he admitted he was, the proconsul tried to persuade him to deny Christ, saying, “Be mindful of your old age,” and similar things, according to their custom, such as, “Swear by the fortune of Caesar; repent, and say, ‘Away with the Atheists.’” But Polycarp, looking out on the crowds, with a very stern face, groaned and looked up to heaven and waved at the crowd of wicked heathen in the stadium and said, “Away with the Atheists!” Then, the proconsul urged him, saying, “Swear, and I will set you free! Reproach Christ!” Polycarp declared, “I have served Him for 86 years, and He never did me any injury. How then can I blaspheme my King and my Savior?”… Then the proconsul said to him, “I have wild beasts here, and I’m going to throw you to them unless you repent.” But he answered, “Call them then, for we are not used to repenting of what is good in order to adopt something evil. Besides, it is good for me to be changed from something evil into something that is righteous.” But again the proconsul said to him, “I will have you burned alive, since you despise the wild beasts, unless you repent.” But Polycarp said, “You threaten me with a fire that will burn for only an hour and then is put out, but you don’t know about the fire of the judgment to come and the eternal punishment reserved for the ungodly. Why are you waiting? Go ahead, do what you need to do.”… They did not nail him to the stake, but simply tied him to it. He put his hands behind him, and being bound like a distinguished ram taken out of a great flock for sacrifice, and prepared to be an acceptable burnt-offering to God, Polycarp looked up to heaven and said, “O Lord God Almighty, the Father of Your beloved and blessed Son, Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the knowledge of You, the God of angels and powers and of every creature and of the whole race of the righteous who live before You, I give You thanks that You have counted me worthy of this day and this hour, that I should have a part in the number of Your martyrs, in the cup of Your Christ, to the resurrection of eternal life, both of soul and body, through the incorruption given by the Holy Spirit. May I be accepted among them this day before You as a fat and acceptable sacrifice, according as You, the ever- truthful God, have foreordained and have revealed beforehand to me and now have fulfilled. Therefore I praise You for all things. I bless You. I glorify You, along with the everlasting and heavenly Jesus Christ, Your beloved Son, with whom, to You, and the Holy Ghost, be glory both now and to all coming ages. Amen.”
—from The Martyrdom of Polycarp

## Polycarp of Smyrna, Pastor and Martyr

Born around AD 69, Polycarp was a central figure in the Early Church. A disciple of the evangelist John, he linked the first generation of believers to later Christians. After serving for many years as bishop of Smyrna, Polycarp was arrested, tried, and executed for his faith on February 23, in AD 155 or 156. An eyewitness narrative of his death, The Martyrdom of Polycarp continues to encourage believers in times of persecution.
