# March 19

## Writing for St. Joseph, Guardian of Jesus

When Joseph became aware that Mary was with child, and was thinking of putting her away privately, the angel said to him while he was asleep: “Do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife, for her conception is from the Holy Spirit. For she will deliver a Son and you will call Him Jesus, for He will save His people from their sins.”… So Joseph was convinced beyond all doubt, and he took Mary and joyfully obeyed everything in regard to all the rest of the education of Christ, undertaking a journey into Egypt and back again, and then went away to Nazareth. Those who do not know the Scriptures, nor the promise of God, nor the dispensation of Christ, call him the father of the child. For this reason, too, the Lord Himself read at Capernaum the prophecies of Isaiah: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He has anointed Me; He has sent Me to preach the Gospel to the poor and to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and to give sight to the blind.” Thus He showed that it was He Himself who had been foretold by Isaiah the prophet, and He said to them: “Today this Scripture is fulfilled in your ears.”
—Irenaeus of Lyons

## St. Joseph, Guardian of Jesus

St. Joseph has been honored throughout the Christian centuries for his faithful devotion in helping Mary raise her Son. Matthew’s Gospel relates that Joseph was a just man, who followed the angel’s instructions and took the already-pregnant Mary as his wife (Matthew 1:24). In the Gospels according to Matthew and Mark, Jesus is referred to as “the carpenter’s son” (Matthew 13:55; Mark 6:3). This suggests that Joseph had building skills with which he supported his family. Joseph was an important figure in the early life of Jesus, safely escorting Mary and the child to Egypt (Matthew 2:14) and then settling them back in Nazareth once it was safe to do so (Matthew 2:22). The final mention of Joseph is at the time the twelve- year-old Jesus visits the temple in Jerusalem for the Passover (Luke 2:41– 51). Joseph, the guardian of our Lord, has long been associated with caring parenthood as well as with skilled craftsmanship.
