# March 31

## Writing for Joseph, Patriarch

I would like to tell you an instructive and profitable story. What is it? Once, when a persecution arose, and a severe war was raging against the Church, two men were arrested. The one man was ready to suffer anything at all. The other man was prepared to submit with firmness to be beheaded, but was afraid and trembling and shied away from other tortures. So, how did things turn out for them? When the judge was seated, he ordered the one who was ready to endure anything, to be beheaded. The other he caused to be hung up and tortured, and that not once or twice, but from city to city. Now why was this permitted? That he might recover through torture that quality of mind which he had neglected, that he might shake off all cowardice, and no longer be afraid to endure anything. Joseph, too, when he wanted to escape from prison, was left to remain there. For hear him saying, “Indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews; please mention me to the king.” And for this he was made to remain, that he might learn not to place hope or confidence in men, but to cast everything on God. Knowing these things, therefore let us give thanks to God, and let us do all things that are expedient for us, that we may obtain the good things to come, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, with whom to the Father be glory, with the Holy Spirit, now and ever and world without end. Amen.
—John Chrysostom

## Joseph, Patriarch

Joseph was the son of the patriarch Jacob (February 5) and Rachel. The favorite son of his father, Joseph incurred the jealousy of his older brothers, who sold him into slavery in Egypt and told their father he was dead (Genesis 37). In Egypt, Joseph became the chief servant in the home of Potiphar, a military official. Because Joseph refused to commit adultery with his master’s wife, he was unjustly accused of attempted rape and thrown into jail (Genesis 39). Years later, he interpreted dreams for Pharaoh, who then freed Joseph from prison and placed him in charge of the entire country. When his brothers came from Canaan to Egypt in search of food, they did not recognize Joseph. He eventually revealed his identity to them, forgave them, and invited both them and his father to live in Egypt. Joseph is especially remembered and honored for his moral uprightness (Genesis 39) and for his willingness to forgive his brothers (Genesis 45 and 50).
