# May 11

## Writing for Cyril and Methodius, Missionaries to the

Slavs There is no other sign by which you can know where Christ and his church may be found than this one sure sign, this star, the holy gospel; every other sign is false and fails. Where the gospel is preached, there this star shines brightly, there without a doubt Christ is present, there you will assuredly find the church, whether it be in Turkey, in Russia, in Bohemia, or anywhere else. It is impossible that God’s word should be proclaimed and God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit not be present. Likewise it is impossible that God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, the church, or anything blessed should be present where God’s word is not proclaimed, even if they were to perform every imaginable miracle; nothing but the Herodists and the devil’s realm can be present there. It has always been clear that the pope and the clergy do not proclaim God’s word, but are merely concerned about doctrines of men.
—Martin Luther

## Cyril and Methodius, Missionaries to the Slavs

Cyril (AD 826–69) and Methodius (ca. 815–85) were brothers who came from a Greek family in Thessalonica and were both ordained as priests. After ordination, Cyril became librarian at the Church of Holy Wisdom (Hagia Sophia) in Constantinople. In AD 862, the brothers were sent by the emperor as missionaries to what is now the Czech republic, where they taught in the native Slavic tongue. Cyril invented the alphabet known today as “Cyrillic,” which provided a written language for the liturgy and Scriptures for the Slavic peoples. This use of the vernacular established an important principle for evangelical missions.
