# May 21

## Writing for Emperor Constantine, Christian Ruler,

and Helena, Mother of Constantine We have been informed that Constantine was led to honor the Christian religion through a combination of events, particularly when a sign from heaven appeared. When he first decided to go to war against Maxentius, he was plagued with doubts about how he would go about fighting the war and where he could look for help. In the midst of his doubt and worry he received a vision and saw the cross shining in heaven. He was amazed at the sight, but holy angels who were standing by exclaimed, “Constantine! By this sign, conquer!” And it is said that Christ Himself appeared to him, showed him the symbol of the cross, and commanded him to construct one like it and to use it as his help in battle, and it would ensure his victory. Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus, affirms that he heard the emperor declare with an oath, as the sun was on the point of inclining about the middle of the day, that he and the soldiers who were with him saw in heaven the trophy of the cross composed of light and encircled by the following words: “By this sign, conquer.”… While he was reflecting on what this could mean, night came. When he fell asleep, Christ appeared with the sign that he had seen in heaven and commanded him to construct a representation of the symbol and to use it as his help in battle. There was nothing further to be said, for the emperor clearly understood the necessity of serving God. At daybreak he called together the priests of Christ and questioned them concerning their doctrines. They opened the Sacred Scriptures and explained the truths relative to Christ and showed him from the prophets how the signs that had been predicted had been fulfilled. The sign that had appeared to him was the symbol, they said, of the victory over hell, for Christ came among men, was stretched upon the cross, died, and returned to life the third day. On this account, they said, there was hope that at the end of the present age there would be a resurrection from the dead.
—The Ecclesiastical History of Sozomen

## Emperor Constantine, Christian Ruler, and Helena,

Mother of Constantine Constantine I served as Roman emperor from AD 306 to 337. During his reign, the persecution of Christians was forbidden by the Edict of Milan in AD 313, and, ultimately, the faith gained full imperial support. Constantine took an active interest in the life and teachings of the Church and in AD 325 called the Council of Nicaea, at which orthodox Christianity was defined and defended. His mother, Helena (ca. AD 255–329), strongly influenced Constantine. Her great interest in locating the holy sites of the Christian faith led her to become one of the first Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land. Her research led to the identification of biblical locations in Jerusalem, Bethlehem, and beyond, which are still maintained as places of worship today.
