# June 11

## Writing for St. Barnabas, Apostle

When the Lord says, “You shall love the Lord your God, from all your heart and from all your mind; and you shall love your neighbor as yourself,” let the faithful soul put on the unfading love of its Author and Ruler and subject itself also entirely to His will in whose works and judgments true justice and tender-hearted compassion never fail. For though a man be worn out with labor and many misfortunes, there is good reason for him to endure all these things, in the knowledge that adversity will either prove him good or make him better. But this godly love cannot be perfect unless a man love his neighbor also. Under which name must be included not only those who are connected with us by friendship or community, but absolutely all men, with whom we have a common nature, whether they be enemies or friends, slaves or free. For the one Maker fashioned us, the one Creator breathed life into us; we all enjoy the same sky and air, the same days and nights, and, though some be good, others bad, some righteous, others unrighteous, yet God is bountiful to all, kind to all, as Paul and Barnabas said to the Lycaonians concerning God’s providence: “who in generations gone by allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways. And yet He left Himself not without witness, doing them good, giving rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, and filling our hearts with food and gladness.” But the wide extent of Christian grace has given us yet even greater reasons for loving our neighbor, which, reaching to all parts of the whole world, looks down on no one and teaches that no one is to be neglected. And He is absolutely right when He commands us to love our enemies and to pray to Him for our persecutors, who, daily grafting shoots of the wild olive from among all nations upon the holy branches of His own olive, makes men reconciled instead of enemies, adopted sons instead of strangers, just instead of ungodly, “that every knee may bow in heaven and on earth, and under the earth, and every tongue confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father.”
—Leo the Great

## St. Barnabas, Apostle

St. Barnabas was a Levite from Cyprus who sold some land and gave the proceeds to the early Christian community in Jerusalem (Acts 4:36–37). St. Paul informs us that he was a cousin of John Mark (Colossians 4:10). Barnabas was sent by the Jerusalem Church to oversee the young Church in Antioch (Acts 11:22). While there, he went to Tarsus and brought Paul back to Antioch to help him (Acts 11:25–26). It was this Church in Antioch that commissioned and sent Barnabas and Paul on the first missionary journey (Acts 13:2–3). When it was time for the second missionary journey, however, Barnabas and Paul disagreed about taking along John Mark. Barnabas took Mark and went to Cyprus; Paul took Silas and headed north through Syria and Cilicia (Acts 15:36–41). Nothing more is known of the activities of Barnabas, except that he was apparently known to the Corinthians (1 Corinthians 9:6). Tradition relates that Barnabas died a martyr’s death in Cyprus by being stoned.
