# June 14

## Writing for Elisha

When Elijah went up to heaven, he left nothing to his disciple save his cloak. “By the help of this,” said he, “I have wrestled with the devil, and taking this, be armed against him!” For poverty is a powerful weapon, an unassailable retreat, an unshaken fortress! Elisha received the cloak as the greatest inheritance—more precious than gold. And thenceforth that Elisha was a twofold person: an Elias above and an Elias below! I know you consider that just person blessed, and you want to be like that person. What, then, if I show you that all among us, who are initiated, receive something far greater than he did? For Elijah left a cloak to his disciple, but the Son of God ascending left to us His own flesh! Elias indeed cast off his mantle before he went up; but Christ left it behind for our sakes, and yet retained it when He ascended. Let us not, then, be cast down. Let us not lament nor fear the difficulty of the times, for He who did not refuse to pour out His blood for all and has allowed us to partake of His flesh and of His blood again, what will He refuse to do for our safety? Confident then in these hopes, let us pray to Him continually.
—John Chrysostom

## Elisha

Elisha, son of Shaphat of the tribe of Issachar, was the prophet of God to the Northern Kingdom of Israel around 849–786 BC. Upon seeing his mentor, Elijah, taken up into heaven, Elisha assumed the prophetic office and took up the mantle of his predecessor. Like Elijah, Elisha played an active role in political affairs. He also performed many miracles, such as curing the Syrian army commander Naaman of his leprosy (2 Kings 5) and restoring life to the son of a Shunammite woman (2 Kings 4:8–37). A vocal opponent of Baal worship, Elisha lived up to his name, which means “my God is salvation.”
