# June 12

## Writing for The Ecumenical Council of Nicaea, AD 325

Forasmuch as the great and holy Synod, which was assembled at Nicaea through the grace of Christ and our most religious Sovereign Constantine, who brought us together from our several provinces and cities, has considered matters which concern the faith of the Church, it seemed to us to be necessary that certain things should be communicated from us to you in writing, so that you might have the means of knowing what has been rejected and investigated, and also what has been decreed and confirmed. First, then, in the presence of our most religious Sovereign Constantine, investigation was made of matters concerning the impiety and transgression of Arius and his adherents. And it was unanimously decreed that he and his impious opinion should be anathematized, together with the blasphemous words and speculations in which he indulged, blaspheming the Son of God, and saying that He is from things that are not, and that before He was begotten He was not, and that there was a time when He was not, and that the Son of God is by His free will capable of vice and virtue; saying also that He is a creature. All these things the holy Synod has anathematized, not even enduring to hear his impious doctrine and madness and blasphemous words.
—The Synodal Letter from the First Ecumenical Council of Nicaea The

## Ecumenical Council of Nicaea, AD 325

The first Council of Nicaea was convened in the early summer of AD 325 by Roman Emperor Constantine at what is today Iznik, Turkey. The emperor presided at the opening of the council. The council ruled against the Arians, who taught that Jesus was not the eternal Son of God but was created by the Father and was called Son of God because of His righteousness. The chief opponents of the Arians were Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, and his deacon, Athanasius. The council confessed the eternal divinity of Jesus and adopted the earliest version of the Nicene Creed, which in its entirety was adopted at the Council of Constantinople in AD 381.
