# Chapter 5: The Gospel of a New Creation

When Christians are caught up in a sin or when they realize they are not living as God wants them to live, they ask themselves, “How can I change? How can I conform my life to God’s will? How can I stop committing this sin?” People asking those questions know God forgives all their sins, and they find comfort from the message of forgiveness. Christians know that God will give them the strength to overcome sin. They may read books to help them in their resolve, and they may try techniques to help themselves resist. They may read the Bible for hours on end, and they may meditate on the forgiveness they find in the Lord’s Supper.

Yet all the time they wonder why they have not improved. God works in mysterious ways, and perhaps time spent in defeat over some sin is God’s way of curbing an even greater

sin, the sin of pride that lurks below the surface in all of us. Yet perhaps lack of victory over sin comes because people do not really mine the depths of God’s Word to discover the gospel in all its breadth and depth. Perhaps those people are focusing too much on their lack of performance for God than on the vast spectrum of God’s performance for them.

Let’s take this thought one step further. Perhaps a Christian has heard all that God has done for him or her but has not really savored what God has made of him or her. Lutherans focus on God’s verdict of not guilty, justification, as the heart of the gospel, and rightly so. That is where everything begins. They are often afraid to emphasize Christ dwelling in us, and sometimes rightly so, because of all the talk we hear about the experience of “receiving Christ into your life” that has dominated many Christians’ lives.

Preaching and teaching exclusively about God’s love and forgiveness may not be the worst error a teacher can commit, but we come up short when we do not go further and delve into what that means in the Christian’s being, that is, what it means not only before the throne of God but for the Christian’s own inner life. Having said that, we must be completely clear that if talk about what we have become in Christ in any way clouds over an emphasis on God’s forgiveness in Christ, then we will lose both. But where we are grounded in the substitutionary work of Jesus on the cross, we can, indeed we must, go on and talk about what we have become in him. This is not talk about what we should do for God but what we have become in Christ, which is a reality just as certain as Christ’s death on the cross for us and the forgiveness we have because of his death.

This is gospel motivation as powerful and important as any. It is what Paul talks about in Romans 6 through 8. After he has talked about what Christ has done for us (3:21 through the end of chapter 5), Paul reminds us what Christ’s victory has done in us, that is, what it has made us to be and given us the power to do. This is not a call to serve God because of what he has done for us. It is telling us how our lives are completely bound up in the gospel. Woven throughout this discussion are encouragements to live as we, in fact, are in Christ.

The Christian asks, “How can I change? How can I conform my life to God’s will? How can I stop committing this sin?” Paul tells us, “In Christ, you are already doing that. In Christ, you have become a perfect person, a new creation, a person who is serving God in a perfect way.” “Nonsense,” you say, “Tm a first-class sinner.” “But look here,” Paul says, “in Baptism you died with Christ and rose with him. Your sinful nature was crucified with him, and you are living a life that is dead to sin and alive to God. You are just as perfect as Jesus was when he rose from the dead, for you rose along with him. And think further,” Paul says. “When you came to faith, you were filled with Christ’s righteousness. That became your master, and you are serving that master right now. It replaced the horrible master of sin. But there is more,” Paul reminds us. “When you died and rose with Christ, you died to the law’s demands—all of them—and right now you are serving the Lord in the new way of the Spirit, with a free heart. That’s a fact. You are perfect!”

“So why do I sin?” you ask. Paul answers: “Because you still have a sinful nature that can’t do anything but sin. It is perfectly rotten. I know, because I too have a sinful nature. But never lose sight of what you are. When I think of you, dear Christian, that’s what I see, a perfect being in Christ. And God thinks of you that way too. Take the parts of your body that you are still yielding to sin, and use them in ways that are appropriate for a person who has died and risen from the dead. Take the sinful thoughts and actions, the ones your former master dictated, and get rid of them. Listen to what your new master, righteousness, dictates. And remember that you are free from the law, and your sinful nature has nothing to fan it into flame. Enjoy having it off your back, and do the kind of things your God wants you to do.”

That’s good news. It’s good news about a new being, a new creation God has made of us, which has the power to serve God. Too often we Christians speak in generalities. We say, “Trust in God’s grace and he will give you strength to overcome sin.” True enough. But how? And when? And on what conditions? Paul does not speak in generalities. How do you overcome sin? Through what Christ has made you to be.

When? When you were baptized and right now as you believe in Christ. Conditions? None, other than remembering that you died with Christ and rose with him, that you are filled with Christ’s righteousness and are a slave to that righteousness, that you are no longer under law, and that your sinful nature rests in inactivity.

That’s good news, good news of a new creation. Paul’s words speak to us new creations, giving shape to what we already know as recipients of God’s forgiveness, letting us see clearly what we are, and through that clarity, giving us a rock-solid basis on which to serve the Lord. He tells us not to do something for God out of thanks for his love; he tells us what God has made us to be through his love. There is no “ought to” here. There is only the fact of what we, who are joined to the vine by faith, are doing now. There is no talk of what we potentially can do if. There is only talk of what we are already doing because.

We return to our discussion of Romans 6 through 8. Paul concluded chapter 7 by spelling out that he is a new creation living in a body decimated by sin: “So then, I myself in my mind am a slave to God’s law, but in the sinful nature a slave to the law of sin” (7:25). That almost sounds like a cold, clinical analysis of what he is until we focus on two phrases: “I myself in my mind” and “in the sinful nature.” Paul’s real being is not his sinful nature but the new creation God has made of him. That is good news. You see, it’s not a toss-up as to which side God will judge on the Last Day. God sees Paul for who he really is in Christ and will judge Paul on that basis. That is what Paul now explains in roughly the first half of chapter 8.

As you read Romans 8, keep in mind that Paul is describing what we are in Christ—new creations. In a way consistent with all of Scripture, Paul is saying that we new creations have nothing to fear, for we are not condemned. God is looking at our lives not from the standpoint of the forgiveness and righteousness we have in Christ but from the standpoint of the new life at work in us because of Christ’s righteousness and forgiveness. We are not condemned because “the law of the Spirit of life,” that is, the principle

that through the Spirit I am a new being alive in service to God, has set me free from “the law of sin and death,” that is, the principle that my sinful nature will always be stirred into action by the law, doing things that lead to death. In other words, the good news that we are not condemned is linked to what we have become in Christ.

How did this freedom come about? Not through the law. For although the law is good, it could only inflame the sinful nature into action; it could never make it inactive. So how do we become free from the law of sin and death? God sent his Son, who became like us and condemned sin in his own body. He did this by bearing our sin on himself and then taking it away through his sufferings and death. He did this by fulfilling the law. He did this by joining us to himself in his death and resurrection. Once we were joined with him, our sinful nature lost its power, as Paul has already explained. Now we live a completely righteous life through the “Spirit of life.” The righteous requirements of the law are met in us, for we are walking according to the Spirit of life. And so we are not condemned. God sees in us what he is doing in us through his Spirit, the Spirit who has given us life in Jesus’ death and resurrection. What our sinful nature is doing has no say in God’s verdict on our lives.

Paul expands on this basic thought. Whether or not we are related to God as his sons and daughters depends on who is the guiding principle in our lives. If the real “me” is the sinful nature, I am lost. Why? Because the sinful nature can do nothing to please God. It does not—it cannot—submit to God’s law. It is hostile to God. It leads to death. On the other hand, the mind controlled by the Spirit is life and peace. It is bound up with Christ’s new life in service to God; it submits to God’s will because Christ’s righteousness has become its new master; it is alive in service to God because the law, which can only make us greater sinners, is no longer in the picture. Here there is life, and because there is life, there is peace.

We know God has established peace with us through Jesus bloodshed on the cross. But can we link peace with our new life in Christ? We can, as long as we never separate our new life in Christ from what we have received from Christ through

>

faith. In verse 9 Paul reminds us that we indeed are controlled by the Spirit, if the Spirit lives in us. (There is a bit of a warning in the last half of verse 9. If we reject the Spirit, we have completely lost all of these blessings.)

See what that means for us? If Christ is in us, we are alive because we have his righteousness, which gives life to our spirits and makes us free to serve the Lord. If Christ is in us, even our dead mortal bodies, which sin uses as its instruments, will be raised to life. These are the blessings we have because the law of the Spirit of life has set us free from the law of sin and death.

Now following the pattern he established in Romans 6, Paul encourages us in our lives of service to God. “We have an obligation,” he says. To what? To the Spirit who is living in us. By nature we think we have an obligation to the sinful nature. We think about how we can please the sinful nature—with greed, lust, ambition, anger, and sinful pleasure. And by nature we spend our time planning how to pay our obligation to the flesh. But when we consider what it means that the Spirit is living in us, leading us to love and serve our Lord, and when we consider the outcome of this way of life, we must think differently. We have an obligation to the Spirit, as Paul says in Galatians 5:25: “Since we live by the Spirit, let us keep in step with the Spirit.”

In Romans 8 Paul ties everything together:

If you live according to the sinful nature, you will die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the misdeeds of the body, you will live, because those who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God. For you did not receive a spirit that makes you a slave again to fear, but you received the Spirit of sonship. And by him we cry, “Abba, Father.” The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children. (8:13-16)

Verses 13 and 14 are key. They link our lives of service to God (fulfilling our obligation to the Spirit) with our eternal life. If we are led by the Spirit, then we are children of God. Only then. The two go hand in hand.

We know that eternal life is ours as a gift of God’s grace (Romans 6:23). We know eternal life comes through the

forgiveness of sins won by Christ’s sacrifice on the cross (3:24,28). We know we are saved by faith alone (4:4-8). But we must also realize the dynamic, if we might call it that, of what God’s gracious gifts have done in our minds and hearts. The perfect service that we carry out through the Spirit of life is no less a reality than God’s forgiveness of our sins. It is no less a part of God’s grace than Jesus’ death and resurrection for us.

It is interesting to note that for the first time in the book of Romans, Paul speaks about us as children of God. He did not do this when he proclaimed the gospel in chapters 3 to 5. He does it only now when he speaks of the Spirit working in us. The Spirit of life who is at work in us is also the one who assures us that we have been adopted by God and are now his children. And so where do our loyalties lie? To the flesh or to the Spirit of Christ living in us? Whom should we serve, the flesh whose deeds end in death or the Spirit who has joined us to Christ, created us to be new creatures living in service to God? The answer is obvious.

The good news that we are new creations, and a complete discussion of what this means, is essential to gospel motivation. Too often we jump from what Christ has done for us to what we should do for God. Too often we tell about God’s love and then encourage one another to respond to that love by loving him in return. This is not wrong. What is wrong is to overlook that middle element that Paul uses as his foundation for teaching about service to God, namely, the firm reality of the new creation each of God’s people has become. We have an obligation to God’s love and forgiveness, but we also have an obligation to live according to the Spirit of life that is at work in us by virtue of God’s love and forgiveness.

There almost seems to be a contradiction here: we do serve God; we ought to serve God. In other words, if we do serve God under the impulse of the Spirit of life, why does Paul need to tell us that we should yield ourselves in service to God? J cannot explain it logically, but I know it is true, as do all God’s people. The sinful nature is still there. I still follow its prompting, even though I don’t want to. I need to be reminded of who I really am, what I really am, and what I am now doing through

the Spirit dwelling in me. Ineed to be reminded that the Spirit has led me and know that I am adopted by God as his child and how life in the Spirit will finally conclude. And then I need to be reminded of my obligation to shape my life according to what I already am. Illogical? Perhaps. But it is the logic of a believer’s experience and also the logic Paul uses in Romans 8. If we understand what Paul says in Romans 8, we will understand everything else he says about the new creation we have become in Christ. In 2 Corinthians 5:15-17 Paul wrote:

He died for all, that those who live should no longer live for themselves but for him who died for them and was raised again. So from now on we regard no one from a worldly point of view. Thouglt we once regarded Christ in this way, we do so no longer. Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old has gone, the new has come!

We no longer think of people as the world does. The world knows only service to the sinful nature. It understands doing good only if there is something in it for the doer. It understands only greed, lust, and political maneuverings. It understands only the craving for recognition. In fact, that is how Paul once analyzed Jesus Christ, and in misguided zeal, he persecuted believers in Jesus for it. But when Paul came to know Christ, and be known by Christ, he realized how wrong he was. He came to understand there were vastly different motivations—a vastly different spirit—at work in Christ and his followers. He came to understand the new creation God’s people are through the Spirit of life and how vastly different that is from what they were before. In Galatians 6 Paul writes:

Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything; what counts is a new creation. (verse 15)

The sinful nature has its own way of thinking about one’s relationship with God. A relationship with God, it thinks, must be based on keeping the law. Many Jewish Christians in Paul’s day taught that non-Jews who wanted to become Christians had to be circumcised. Others shot back, saying that

uncircumcision was the way to go, since we are free from Jewish regulations. Yet their way of thinking was as much bound up by the law as the former. None of this matters, writes Paul. All that matters is a new creation, a new being created by the gospel that loves and serves God in freedom prompted by the Spirit.

Paul speaks about the new creation in other terms. In Romans 12:2 he writes:

Do not conform any longer to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Then you will be able to test and approve what God’s will is—his good, pleasing and perfect will.

The word mind refers to the new creation. (See Romans 7:25.) At this point in Romans, Paul is about to launch into his instructions on everyday living. However, even though he will spend several chapters telling the Romans what they are to do, he begins by telling them to be renewed in their minds. In the context of Romans 7 and 8 this can mean nothing else than that we are to remember all that God has done for us and come to understand the new life these truths have created in us. Once we do that, we will have the foundation for determining what is God’s will for our lives. We will understand love, his Jove for us and ours for our fellowman, and love will lead us in determining God’s will. True knowledge of God’s will does not start with the law but with the gospel, for the gospel alone renews our minds, enables us to love, and gives the Holy Spirit free reign in our hearts to produce the fruits of faith. Paul speaks about the new creation again:

Do not lie to each other, since you have taken off your old self with its practices and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator. (Colossians 3:9,10)

Therefore we do not lose heart. Though outwardly we are wasting away, yet inwardly we are being renewed day by day. (2 Corinthians 4:16; note the King James translation: “For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.”)

The new creation is a perfect creation. The Spirit of life working in us is perfect in every way, perfect in zeal and perfect in knowledge. But Paul can also talk about the new self as being in the process of renewal day by day. How does this renewal take place? It takes place as Paul has described it in Romans 6 to 8—through the gospel of Jesus’ death and resurrection, his gift of righteousness, and our release from the law. The sufferings we endure because of our faith wreak havoc with our outward body, either physically or emotionally. We see only death in the offing. But through this we are driven again and again to our Savior and, in the process, are renewed through the Spirit.

True renewal only comes through the gospel, for only the gospel provides the knowledge we need to be led by the Spirit of life. Only the gospel provides the basis on which the Spirit can create new creatures and keep those creations alive. Only the gospel provides the message of Christ’s work for us, which has led to Christ’s work in us, and lays on us the obligation to serve God, which we are most willing to fulfill. Any talk about renewal must center on Christ and only on Christ. When the law predominates, renewal ceases, for the Spirit is lost.

The writer to the Hebrews, quoting from Jeremiah 31:31-34, contrasts the covenant of the law with the promise of the gospel:

The time is coming, declares the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah. It will not be like the covenant I made with their forefathers when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt, because they did not remain faithful to my covenant, and I turned away from them, declares the Lord. This is the covenant I will make with the house of Israel after that time, declares the Lord. I will put my laws in their minds and write them on their hearts. I will be their God, and they will be my people. No longer will a man teach his neighbor, or a man his brother, saying, “Know the Lord,” because they will all know me, from the least of them to the greatest. For I will forgive their wickedness and will remem: ber their sins no more. (Hebrews 8:8-12)

The phrase “I will put my laws in their minds and write them on their hearts” refers to the creation of the new man. What the law was powerless to do, using Paul’s phrase, God did by forgiving “their wickedness” and remembering “their sins no more.” No longer would they be forced to live according to a set rule of laws and have to teach one another the laws (even though those laws were right and good and filled with pictures of God’s future salvation). That didn’t work; for as Paul explains, the law only fuels the sinful nature and gives us reason to sin. Rather, God simply forgave their sins, and with that message of forgiveness came the Holy Spirit and a new way of serving the Lord.

Dear Christian, realize what a wonderful thing it is that right now you are a new creature, made that way through being joined with Christ. Through the Spirit, you are—right now—putting to death the misdeeds of the body.

G
