# Examples

In the previous chapters we looked at gospel motivation according to themes. In this chapter we will look at longer sections of Scripture and focus on the particular lack of sanctification the Bible writer was trying to correct and how he worked to correct it.

The ultimate goal of God’s plan of salvation is to restore us to the perfection and fellowship we had with him in the Garden of Eden. Yet if that was all he wanted for us, he would have taken us to heaven as soon as we came to faith in Christ. Could God accomplish his plan if he did that? Not really. The Lord wants a body of believers to exist in this world so the

faith can be passed down from one generation to the next. As children of God, we are called to be the light of the world and salt of the earth. Our own sanctification dovetails with God’s plan for us, for our congregations, for the world, and, ultimately, for his own glory.

Accordingly, the Bible is not a dogmatics book, in which the teachings of the Christian faith are laid out in systematic order and in which sanctification is discussed particularly in its relation to justification. The New Testament is God’s call to holiness in Christ and to holy living. He makes us his children and then calls us to live in line with what we are. Accordingly, much of the New Testament was written because there were problems im the church or because there was a need to strengthen a particular group of Christians. Even the so-called chief doctrinal book of the New Testament, Romans, was written to strengthen the Roman Christians so they could provide a base of support for Paul when he did mission work in Spain. Many of the beautiful Bible passages we learned in confirmation class, which were set in the context of a doctrinal topic, are actually found in passages that are teaching and encouraging sanctification. For example, many of the beautiful statements of Jesus recorded in the gospel of John were spoken in rebuke of the Pharisees and teachers of the law. In fact, most of John’s gospel—and remember, John is the “apostle of love’—is comprised of Jesus rebuking and trying to correct his enemies.

The Bible is a book about living in holiness to the Lord. How we became holy in Christ is where it all starts. His victory over Satan and his forgiveness of our sins make us heirs of eternal life. We are called on to live lives as God’s people. The world offers many alternatives and tries to force those alternatives on God’s people through persecution of one sort or another. And so do the spiritual powers of darkness. They provide a myriad of other spirits to supplant the Holy Spirit. They take contro] of the leaders of nations who make false teachings the religion of the land and then make life intolerable for God’s people. :

In answer to this, Jesus and his writers urge us to hold on to our faith and live as God’s people. They urge us to maintain

our loyalty to Christ and his chosen apostles. They urge us to follow God’s will. They tell us they are praying for us. And in the process, they provide a beautiful pattern for us when we do the same for our fellow believers. That pattern is what this present book is about. The Lutheran church has sometimes been charged with preaching more justification than sanctification. Sadly, some who are concerned about this solve the problem by talking more about morality, perhaps even cutting back on repeating the basic gospel message. But this problem, if it exists, is easily solved. Working through books of the Bible as they stand, submitting to their agenda and merely seeking to mine their treasures will provide a perfect balance of justification and sanctification. It provides much more, though. It provides a sense of that wonderful “pattern of sound teaching” (2 Timothy 1:13), where our faith in Christ predominates and where sanctification issues are exposed and corrected as only the Holy Spirit can do it.

In this chapter and the next, we will look at a few examples of this pattern. We start with Ephesians 5:22-33. I won’t write out al] these verses. You may wish to read them before you go on. This is the section where Paul tells husbands and wives to submit to each other and then spells out how each should do this.

It is not Paul’s intent merely to outline a program of living. Nor does he merely state God’s will. Rather, he chooses ways of discussing the issue that are drawn from the gospel of God’s grace. In other words, he recognizes the issue (and the problem) and then chooses one aspect of the gospel message appropriate for it. Here he deals with the roles of men and women. Since the roles of men and women deal with (1) a relationship and (2) a relationship in which there is a certain hierarchy (although that is too cold a term), Paul sets the marriage of a man and a woman against the backdrop of the relationship of Christ and the church.

Paul begins with a few words to wives. He tells wives to submit to their husbands. Many wives don’t want to do this. Yet when wives read these words, they see that their submission goes deeper than a forced submission to the sometimes arbitrary human will of their husbands. Paul pictures the

relationship of the church to Christ. Christ is the head; the church is his body. When a wife thinks of this relationship, she sees a beautiful picture in which headship and submission can exist without any feelings of animosity or arbitrary superiority. No member of Christ’s church sees Christ as an arbitrary, self-centered head. Every member of the church willingly submits to Christ because he or she knows that Christ gave up his life for the church and wants nothing but the church’s good. Christ is the perfect head. Husbands are never perfect heads. Sin precludes that. But Paul tells the wife that she should submit to her head with the same devotion that the church submits to Christ. This evokes willingness in the wife to submit to her less-than-perfect husband, for she certainly is willing to submit to Christ.

Paul turns to the husband and has much more to say to him. The picture of Christ loving the church creates a true understanding of headship. The husband often looks to the wife to generate feelings of love in the marriage. But imagine this: If Christ waited for the church to initiate the love in his relationship with her, he would be waiting forever. Christ must lead. He did lead. And the church follows. If there is a lack of love in the marriage, the husband should first look at himself. That said, Paul reminds us of the great sacrifice Christ made for his church. Husbands are to love their wives in the same way, sacrificing themselves for their wives.

Christ did more. He sacrificed himself for his church to make her members into something they were not. He made his church holy. He did this through Baptism (as we saw so clearly in Romans 6), which joins us with Christ in his death and life. He made the church beautiful, and then he presented her to himself in all her perfection and joined her to him. The church (and all her members) has become part of Christ, his body, which he nourishes and cares for. This symbolizes the union between a husband and wife. The wife is the husband’s body, and he is her head; she draws care and nurture from him.

In this section on husbands and wives, the Lord actually dedicates more words to describing Christ and his church. Christian husbands and wives know what Christ means to

them. They know how Christ loves the church, and they understand what it means that the church submits to Christ. They also know how Christ acts toward the church as the church’s head, doing nothing but good for her. It is this union—Christ and his church—that drives Paul’s discussion. It infuses everything he says about the relationship of husbands and wives under God with the gospel. This is true gospel motivation. The gospel sets the tone, gives the pattern, and supplies the reason for how husbands and wives are to deal with each other.
