# What is practical?

At this point let’s pause and think about what Paul is doing in Ephesians 5. Paul here is talking about a very practical subject. How Paul approaches marriage is interesting in view of what our modern culture is crying out for because of its problems with marriage and family issues. The cry today is for practical, easily applied advice. Congregations, wanting to grow, find almost overwhelming the desire to use this need to bring people into association with their church. So they offer practical seminars and programs for the community. Since the home and family in Western culture is disintegrating and many are crying out for answers, churches find ready audiences of husbands and wives seeking answers to their desperate questions about their married lives together.

The comments that follow are meant to lead us to think about what it means for church leaders to be “practical” in view of Paul’s discussion in Ephesians 5 and other places. I believe there is a tension between what is practical in the world’s definition and what is practical in Christian terms. When well-meaning seminar leaders look to Scripture for practical advice, they stumble onto sections of Scripture that contain good advice, to be sure. But they also find the Bible writer’s entire discussion based on the gospel and how life should reflect the Christian hope, not just the desire for a better earthly life.

One person made a helpful distinction between two kinds of knowledge. He distinguished between “good things” and “God’s things.”

Good things are just that, good pieces of knowledge and understanding that one person may gain and pass on to another. Through the work of observing and counseling others and through the writings of particularly wise people, we gather a good deal of knowledge and understanding about how things work. We know what things contribute to our temporal happiness and well-being and what things harm them. The church is often viewed as a dispenser of good things: wisdom from God found in the Bible, put into practice in the Christian community and proven to produce happiness and well-being.

God’s things, though, are different. God’s things relate to our salvation. God’s things stem from a wisdom that is not based on experience. God’s wisdom centers on the death and life of Jesus. It centers on Baptism, on Christ’s righteousness, and on the fact that we are free from the law. God’s things center on the new life created in us. God’s things focus on living in service to God.

The desire to hear good things and put them into practice stems from human desires. The desire to hear God’s things begins with wanting to hear about Christ, and the desire to do the right thing stems from a desire to live in line with what we have become, God’s redeemed children.

The work of the church will invariably entail dispensing good things and God’s things. Counseling will always include practical advice on how to deal with the issues that arise in marriage and the family. Christian love leads us to help in whatever way we can, whether that is relief aid for starvation victims or relief aid to families starving for peace.

But is this the work Christ has given his church? Can good things and God’s things actually coexist in a person’s ministry? I would answer yes and no. Yes, because the Christian will do everything he or she can to help others with whatever needs they have, including marriage and family needs. But I would also answer no, because the church is given the work of proclaiming God’s message of salvation and leading people to live for him. The church must be careful that in its preaching and teaching and even counseling it strives to keep that mission foremost in its mind.

So what does it mean to be practical? Sad to say, in the minds of many, practical religion means religion stripped of theology. It means dispensing how-to advice. It means counseling to one’s individual, personal, and unique needs, rather than preaching global truths that deal with God’s salvation for the whole world and that deal especially with Christians— sin, forgiveness, the new creation, and living lives of love.

We might ask, what does God consider to be truly practical? From Scripture we learn that his definition of practicality is not quite the same as the world’s. The heart of practicality can be summarized in Paul’s statement, “Whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God” (1 Corinthians 10:31). What is to God’s glory? God is glorified when he brings people from darkness to light, extends his rule of grace, and leads people into heaven. God is glorified when people honor, love, and obey him and worship him by following his commands. God is glorified when people seek to grow in Christ, seeking first his kingdom and resting content to have God give them what he wants to give them according to his time schedule.

Everything we have seen about gospel motivation has presupposed that the gospel was the most important thing to Paul’s readers. If it was not, then everything Paul said fell on deaf ears and God has preserved Paul’s words only to be culled for some tidbit of practical truth that can be extracted from it. For example, is Paul talking about husbands and wives in Ephesians 5? Is he giving married people practical advice for living? Again, yes and no. Yes in the sense that Paul is discussing something concrete that I should do in my life. But what he writes was not written to help my earthly well-being but to teach me how to live in light of my faith in Christ, his living relationship with the church. How can anyone offer a practical marriage class to non-Christians in the community and use Ephesians 5? It is beyond me.

Let’s ask the question another way. Is God concerned about our practical happiness and well-being? If you were the Lord, how would you show your concern to someone you love, knowing that the brief and momentary time we spend on this earth is a grain of sand compared with the eternity that stretches

out before us? If you truly loved that person, you would be concerned about whether he or she navigates this life successfully, interpreting the word successfully as avoiding anything that would take away that person’s faith. You certainly would want that person to be happy in his or her marriage. But there may come a time when God may not want a person to have a happy marriage because marital problems are part of his chastening work. Or the Lord may know that the suffering a person must go through is necessary for his or her faith— perhaps a time of humbling or a time when he is dealing with the other spouse’s sinful nature. That is truly practical. That’s the Bible’s definition of practical.

Finally, how would you define practical in light of everything we have seen so far in our look at gospel motivation? How practical is our baptism in terms of Romans 6? How practical is our knowledge that we have received Christ’s righteousness and are slaves of righteousness? How practical is the teaching that we are free from the law? How practical is Paul’s discussion of the new man and the old man? How practical is Paul’s statement that if we put to death the misdeeds of the body, we will live? How practical is the Bible’s teaching of hell and of heaven?

Is there anything on earth that is more practical than these truths? People who have hope only for this life may or may not be influenced by the problems of their lives to seek advice and apply it. Sick people keep on eating as they did before they became sick, even though they know their eating habits will eventually kill them. Alcoholics continue to drink in spite of the harm it causes their bodies, jobs, and home life. Men continue to view pornography in spite of the harm such self-indulgence brings into their lives. You can describe the sin and expose its consequences and still the sinful nature will commit those sins, even to the point of sadistic self-destruction.

Only what transcends this life is truly practical. Only the truth of God’s eternal judgment on the sinner and his gracious redemption in Christ truly mean something. If this life and our happiness here is all there is to live for, then the sinful nature will always win the battle as to how this life should be

lived. If morality is merely a personal thing, warranting reward or punishment in this life, the sinful nature will always win the argument as to whether a little pain is worth the pleasure of lust and sinful ambition. If self-interest is pitted against love and kindness to others, the sinful nature will always choose self-interest, yes, even if it comes in the form of “service to others.”

Only life in Christ transcends the risk of temporal punishment for immorality and our inherent selfishness. It lifts us above the “practical” desires of the world and leads us to think of life in view of God and his glory. Such a view of life can only come through realizing our sin (another theological concept, but so practical in the ultimate sense) and repenting of it. It comes only by submitting to Christ’s righteousness and finding our hope there. It comes only through the power of the Holy Spirit working through the gospel of our death and life in Christ. The sinful nature can only be stopped when in Christ the law’s demands are removed from contact with the lusts of the sinful nature. Only then can I serve in a new and willing spirit. The church can only carry out its mission and be truly practical if it relegates itself to preaching the law and the gospel. Every other message is a Band-Aid for a cancer patient.
