# Examples, continued

We should get back to the theme of this chapter, namely, instances of how the writers of the New Testament weave the gospel into all their admonitions and encouragements.

One of the most striking sections of the New Testament for our purposes is a series of chapters in 1 Corinthians. Those familiar with 1 Corinthians know it to be a letter written to a congregation that had a lot of problems. The Lord had richly blessed the Corinthians, but they did not make the jump from pagan thinking to godly thinking overnight, at least not in every corner of their lives.

In his first letter to the Corinthians, Paul addresses a number of problems, spanning chapters 5 through 14. He moves from one issue to the next. What is striking is the pattern he follows. He presents the issue, and then he follows with some aspect of the gospel or with some way the gospel has had an

impact on the Corinthians’ lives. We will take the issues in order. You may want to read chapters 5 through 11. (Add 12 through 14 if you wish. We'll touch briefly on those chapters.)

In chapter 5 Paul addresses a sin that a member of the church was committing. A man was committing incest with his mother (probably his stepmother). The sin was out in the open, and the members of the congregation knew about it. They were also being rather open-minded about the sin, and they refused to take a stand against it. Paul rebuked them. He said, “Hand this man over to Satan, so that the sinful nature may be destroyed and his spirit saved on the day of the Lord” (verse 5). At this point Paul injected the gospel into his discussion. He did it in a way that fit the problem he was working with. Not all the Corinthians were engaged in the actual sin, of course. But they were implicating themselves in it by not doing anything about it. So how should Paul bring the gospel into the mix? Remember, he has already rebuked the Corinthians with the law. Now he wants to fill their hearts with gospel motivation. Paul is not just concerned about the immoral nature of the sin, the effects the sin might have on the people committing it, or even about the spiritual life of the Corinthian church. Paul knows that if they continue to condone the sin, the gospel will no longer mean anything to them and eventually they will lose it.

Paul’s approach to the problem contains three elements (1 Corinthians 5:6-8). First, he uses a few short phrases designed to remind his readers of a time in the Old Testament when the gospel shone clearly in the lives of God’s people. This was the Passover. Second, he states that the Passover was fulfilled when Jesus died for their sins. Third, he shows how the Passover Feast (the festival Israel was to follow in the days after the Passover itself) was fulfilled in their lives when they came to know Jesus.

Paul encouraged them in a masterful way. The people of Israel were to get rid of yeast in their homes prior to the Passover. When the day came, they were to make unleavened bread and eat it with the lamb that had been killed earlier that day. A little yeast left in the home could potentially work its way into the dough and spoil the unleavened bread. Yeast

was clearly a picture of sin. When the people of Israel rid their homes of yeast, in their minds they were purifying their lives so they could celebrate the Passover. The unleavened bread symbolized repentance and a home that had rid itself of sin.

Paul wove all these ideas together. Jesus, our Passover Lamb, has been sacrificed. We have the forgiveness of sin. We are to rid our lives of the leaven of sin and be pure, just “as [we] really are.” In other words, in our lives we are to be what we have become in Christ. Then as we eat the Passover festival every day anew, we are not to eat it with the sinful bread we used to eat but with unleavened bread, that is, with sincere hearts, doing what is in line with the truth.

Using images from the first Passover, Paul sets Christ, the Passover Lamb, in the middle of the problem. Paul is confident that the Corinthians’ love for Christ will shape their hearts to follow God’s will.

In 1 Corinthians 6, Paul addresses lawsuits among believers (verses 1-11) and sexual immorality (verses 12-20). The Corinthians were dragging fellow Christians before secular courts and leveling charges against them. Paul rebuked them in a number of ways. He finished his rebuke by getting to the heart of the problem—greed and wickedness. He reminded the Corinthians:

Do you not know that the wicked will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor male prostitutes nor homosexual offenders nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. (1 Corinthians 6:9,10)

But then, after this scathing rebuke, Paul reminds them that they have been delivered from these sins and their inevitable end.

That is what some of you were. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God. (1 Corinthians 6:11)

The gospel is closely packed into these verses. In one short verse, we have the message of Baptism, the forgiveness of

sins, God’s declaration of justification (“not guilty”), and reminders that all this came through Jesus Christ, and that we have received the Holy Spirit, who has worked all of these blessings in us.

In 1 Corinthians 6:12-20, Paul addresses sexual immorality. The sin of prostitution was common in Corinth as in most of the ancient world. The sexual act had deep religious significance. Many Corinthians believed that when the gods saw humans having sexual intercourse, they were moved to make the earth fertile and bless humans with the gift of children. Ingrained patterns of behavior were hard to break, especially in regard to actions that had formerly been considered to be a religious duty. :

Paul knew he had to rebuke the Corinthians. He did, but he also wove the gospel into his rebuke, again, in a way especially tailored to the problem. Since the sin had to do with their bodies, Paul addressed the issue from that standpoint. Paul pointed out the relation of our bodies to our Lord. The body is “for the Lord, and the Lord for the body” (verse 13). Christ and his Father have come to live in us. For this reason we are to use our bodies in service to the Lord: “Offer yourselves to God, as those who have been brought from death to life; and offer the parts of your body to him as instruments of righteousness” (Romans 6:13). In 1 Corinthians 6:17, Paul reminds the Corinthians that in Christ they have the wonderful blessing of being united in spirit with God. Why give up that unity by being joined with a prostitute? In verses 19 and 20, Paul reminds us that God’s Spirit is living in us. God gave us his Spirit because Christ gave up his own life to make us people who belong to God. Our union with Christ precludes union with sin.

In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul answers questions the Corinthians had asked about marriage. Paul does not weave the gospel into his answers as he did in the previous two chapters. But it is clear that the gospel and the Corinthians’ relationship with Christ is still at the heart of his thoughts. Husbands and wives should not deprive each other, lest Satan tempt them (7:5). Christians should not divorce their non-Christian spouses, because if they do, their spouses and children will

not have the presence of the gospel in their lives. A Christian 1s so concerned about the faith of his or her children and spouse that he or she is willing to remain in a difficult marriage for the sake of their spiritual welfare (7:14).

Christians should be content to remain in whatever situation they were in when they came to faith. This could apply to marriage or to circumcision. Slaves should be content to remain slaves if it is God’s will, because in Christ they are free. Freemen should not look down on their slaves, because through faith they themselves have become slaves to God and to the righteousness they have by faith (7:20-24). Even the decision whether or not to get married is to be guided by how this impacts one’s work for the Lord.

In 1 Corinthians 8, Paul addresses eating food sacrificed to idols. Most modern readers, especially Western readers, probably won't relate to this problem. Here’s what was happening. A citizen of an ancient heathen city worshiped his or her god by bringing a sacrifice to the temple. The sacrifice might be a lamb or goat or cow. Often we imagine the priest leading this sacrifice to the altar, killing it, cutting it apart, and burning the whole thing. That would only be partially correct. Some of the sacrifices were probably burned up completely. But in many cases, only parts of the sacrifice were burned, perhaps because the priest thought the parts were what the god preferred. Much of the sacrifice remained after the ceremony was over. A good portion of the meat was sent to butcher shops adjacent to the temple. The money the people paid to buy the meat would go to support the temple. It was an ongoing bake sale of sorts.

If you had just come to faith in Christ, what would you have done if this were the only place, or perhaps the most convenient place, to buy meat? That’s the situation behind the issue Paul had to address. Some were buying and eating this meat in good conscience, realizing that a false god was a figment of people’s imagination, prompted by Satan. Others, however, felt that an idol, a figment of sinful imagination or not, was still associated with sins against the First Commandment. They felt guilt by association and refused to eat this meat. If they went to the home of someone who served such

meat, they might think, “Well, it is probably okay to eat this. My conscience feels uneasy about joining in, but Ill eat it anyway.” When a Christian sins against his conscience like this, he sins, even if what he is doing is not sinful.

You can probably guess how Paul would advise in this matter. Read the following verses to find out. For our purposes, however, we are interested if and how Paul weaves the gospel into his instructions. He does not disappoint us. Once again, he weaves the gospel into the section in a way appropriate to the theme. Read how Paul begins the section, and also read verses 4, 7, and 10. The main words are know and knowledge. The problem originated between some people who knew something (it’s okay to eat this food) and some who did not know this, or at least did not accept it in their hearts and consciences. So Paul focuses on knowledge:

Now about food sacrificed to idols: We know that we all possess knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. The man who thinks he knows something does not yet know as he ought to know. But the man who loves God is known by God. (1 Corinthians 8:1-3)

Paul begins with the concept of knowledge. Then he immediately shifts the thought to love, because love, not knowledge, is important. Knowledge can tear Christians apart. Love will always bind them together. So far, so good. But note the beautiful touch of Paul’s final words in verse 3. There is a very important kind of knowledge, Paul says. It’s the knowledge God has of us, that he knows us in Christ and views us as his children in Christ. Tracking Paul’s thought backwards, he points out that those who know that they are known by God will reflect God’s love. Love will direct them to handle the situation correctly. In a concise way, the whole issue is introduced and resolved. Understand knowledge in the right way, Paul says, and then love your fellow Christian (who may not be on your level of knowledge) because you know that God loves you in Christ (in spite of the fact that you are not at all on Christ’s level). ‘

As we work through this section, we see other bits of gospel woven into Paul’s words. He reminds us that if

we selfishly force our knowledge on one of God’s children, we will destroy someone “for whom Christ died” (verse 11). He also focuses on the true knowledge that binds us together with fellow Christians. There is one Father who made us and directs our lives; there is “but one Lord, Jesus Christ” who created all things and died for us so that we might live in him. This way of speaking helps us see our fellow Christians for who they are, namely, people who are one with us in the Lord.

First Corinthians 9 is a bit different than the preceding chapters. Some in the Corinthian congregation were judging Paul and criticizing the way he carried out his ministry. In his defense, Paul speaks about the purity and sincerity of his heart when he preached the gospel to them. He explains how the gospel is continually motivating him to give his entire life in its service. We won’t look at this section in detail, but one verse summarizes everything he says: “I do all this for the sake of the gospel, that I may share in its blessings” (1 Corinthians 9:23).

Citizens of a Greek city-state like Corinth were brought up worshiping idols. It was nothing strange to them. The temptations they faced would be equivalent to what a Japanese Christian today would face at conversion. If one spouse in the marriage came to faith, he or she would still go to bed at night looking at his or her spouse’s little Shinto shrine in the bedroom or perhaps a shrine to Buddha in the hallway. Secular and sacred would be mixed, and not going to an idol celebration for conscience reasons would be like taking a stand against a Fourth of July celebration in the United States.

The temptation to bow down before idols was strong in Corinth. The comparison of an idol festival with a Fourth of July celebration breaks down, however, when we realize what idol festivals entailed. When the gods were worshiped with temple prostitution, you can imagine the further compromises Christians were forced to make if they did give in to pressure to attend a feast.

This is the situation Paul addresses in 1 Corinthians 10. There are a lot of law warnings in verses 1 to 13, where Paul draws from Israel’s history. But there is also gospel woven in.

For example, Paul urges the Corinthians to remember God’s blessings: Christ himself, Baptism, and the Lord’s Supper:

I do not want you to be ignorant of the fact, brothers, that our forefathers were all under the cloud and that they all passed through the sea. They were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. They all ate the same spiritual food and drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them, and that rock was Christ. Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them; their bodies were scattered over the desert. (1 Corinthians 10:1-5)

Look at how creative Paul is. He joins New Testament Christians with Old Testament believers so he can use the sins of people in the Old Testament to warn the Corinthians against idolatry. The Israelites were baptized into Moses, a man in service to the Lord on behalf of Israel. We also have been baptized into Jesus’ death and resurrection. The Israelites ate spiritual food—manna from heaven—and they drank spiritual drink—water flowing from dry rocks. We also eat spiritual food and drink spiritual drink—the Lord’s Supper. They had Christ, the Angel of the Lord, accompanying them. We also are joined to Christ by faith, and he accompanies us through life. In a masterful way, Paul links us with the Old Testament people of God and reminds us of the blessings we have received. Now he can warn the Corinthians and us against idolatry. The Israelites rejected God’s blessings, and God punished them. We should never follow their pattern.

Beginning in 1 Corinthians 10:14, where he addresses idol feasts directly, Paul follows his pattern by placing the gospel of the Lord’s Supper right in the middle of the problem. Paul begins by reminding the Corinthians of what they ate and drank in the Lord’s Supper:

I speak to sensible people; judge for yourselves what I say. Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that. we break a participation in in the body of Christ? (1 Corinthians 10:15,16)

The problem Paul is addressing has to do with eating and drinking at an idol feast. So his theme is going to be just that, eating and drinking at a feast. Christians also have a feast, the Lord’s feast, to which the Lord has invited us. When we drink wine at his feast, we drink the blood of Christ. When we eat bread at his feast, we eat the body of Christ. We also join ourselves with fellow Christians, for when we eat and drink we participate in the one Christ.

Paul applies all this in these words: “You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons too; you cannot have a part in both the Lord’s table and the table of demons” (1 Corinthians 10:21). Paul’s warning is not a bare warning based on the Ten Commandments. It is a warning based on the incongruity of doing two opposite things at the same time. Such a thing will “arouse the Lord’s jealousy.”

Returning to the issue of eating food from the butcher shops located around the idol temples, Paul writes, “Whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God” (1 Corinthians 10:31).

We have already discussed chapter 11 to some extent in our section on the gospel of the sacraments. The Corinthians were having trouble in their worship services; specifically, the rich were looking down on the poor and segregating themselves from them. So what does Paul do? He reminds them again of the Lord’s Supper that both the rich and poor celebrate together. This will have the effect of clearing up the problems from within, that is, hearts motivated by the gospel of forgiveness contained in the Lord’s Supper will enable the Corinthians to deal with fellow Christians in love.

First Corinthians 12 and 14 deal with spiritual gifts. We won't be looking at these chapters in detail. Please note one thing, however. Right in the middle of his discussion on the proper use of spiritual gifts—which can stir up pride and strife if not used in a God-pleasing way—Paul places what has become one of the most famous chapters in Scripture, the chapter on love. This chapter deals with brotherly love in Christ, the kind of love that will guide and shape the way Christians use their spiritual gifts. God’s gifts, Paul says,

mean nothing unless they are used in a spirit of love, which can only come from the knowledge of God’s love for us.

We will touch on a few more special examples in the next chapter.
