# Translators' Note

‘What is the good of giving ... a stiff and strict rendering, when the reader can make nothing of it?’ asked Luther. He was speaking specifically of translating the Bible, but the principle applies equally to all translation work. This edition of Luther’s own *magnum opus, De Servo Arbitrio* (literally, *On the Enslaved Will)* was originally to have been a revision of Henry Cole’s translation of 1823, reprinted in a slightly revised form by Henry Atherton in 1931. It became evident, however, that the tortuous, ‘stiff and strict’ style of this translation so obscured the meaning and force of the original that it was better to attempt a completely new translation, which might more adequately convey to modern readers the impetuous flow and dialectical strength of Luther’s powerful Latin. Such a translation we have accordingly sought to produce.

The text used is that edited by Otto Clemen in *Luthers Werke in Auswahl,* III. 94ff. (Berlin, 1929), collated with that edited by A. Freitag in the Weimar edition of Luther’s works (cited as *W.A. [=Weimarer Ausgabe]'),* XVIII.597ff. The translation has been cotnpared throughout with Bruno Jordahn’s modern German version in the Munich edition of Luther’s works, *Vom unfreien Willen* (1954) which contains a critical discussion of the main points of the treatise in full notes. The Diatribe of Erasmus, to which Luther is here making reply, may be conveniently studied in the modern French translation by Pierre Mesnard, *Erasme de Rotterdam. Essai sur le libre arbitre* (Algiers, 1945), though Mesnard’s Introduction is not entirely reliable. The book’s argument is summarised in R. A. Meissinger, *Erasmus von Rotterdam* (Vienna, 1942). We cite Erasmus’ letters from the Oxford edition of P. S. Allen, *Erasmi Epistolae (Ep.),* the number of the volume being followed by the number of the letter.

The division of Luther’s treatise into its eight main parts, and then into further sections according to subject-matter, is a new feature in this edition. It is hoped that the table of contents, together with the index of Biblical references, will make the work easy for study and reference. All Biblical references in brackets, and all verse numbers have been added by us. Luther refers only to chapters and sometimes wrongly, as will be seen. In Biblical quotations we have kept as close to the Authorized Version as Luther’s Latin allowed. The statements which Luther extracts from the Diatribe for discussion are italicised in the text; those which he quotes verbatim are enclosed in quotation marks also. Where further extracts from the Diatribe seemed to be needed in order to make clear the point of Luther’s remarks, they have been added in italics in the notes.

Our thanks are due to the Rev. S. M. Houghton and Mr. A. E. Grant for help with the proofs and the index.

J. I. Packer O. R. Johnston
