# Historical and Theological Introduction

## I. Erasmus to 1517

Desiderius Erasmus was born in Rotterdam between 1466 and 1469. From 1474 to 1484 he attended the famous school at Deventer directed by the Brethren of the Common Life, a peaceful mystical brotherhood renowned for their simple piety and for the high standard of education which their schools offered. At the end of his school years he became a monk, much against his will, it seems. Though monastic life offered access to books and time for study, in the Augustinian monastery at Steyn Erasmus felt keenly the lack of congenial company, and the poor food and the daily routine were harmful to his delicate health. In 1493, however, after seven years at Steyn, he obtained a dispensation of temporary leave from this religious community, for he had been disappointed in his hope of finding time and opportunity to pursue the humanistic studies which had attracted him since his earliest reading. In 1495 he reached Paris—the great University city, with its libraries, lectures, learned men, and everlasting discussion. His order was never able to reclaim him.

Yet even Paris was disappointing. The official curriculum— if we may use such a term for the teaching of the day—was dry, academic, and suspicious of all new approaches in matters of divinity. The only theological differences allowed were quibbling and unreal; the great creative epoch of the twelfth-and thirteenth-century renaissance, the age of Albertus Magnus and Aquinas, was but a distant echo. Tradition reigned, and Erasmus was already tired of traditional theology.

In 1499 he made his first visit to England and met the English humanists. At Oxford he heard Colet lecture on St. Paul’s Epistles, expounding them from the Greek in a direct and personal way without allegorical interpretation. The influence of men like Grocyn and Linacre and the friendship of Colet and Thomas More showed Erasmus that there were other humanists who valued Greek as highly as **he** himself was coming to do, and this made him all the more eager to apply himself to the task of mastering the other great classical tongue. Further, he found that they too were ready to castigate in merciless sermon and epigram the corrupt state of contemporary religion, especially the laziness and vice concealed in the monasteries and the empty subtleties of the scholastic theologians, so far removed from the pure simplicity which, to Erasmus, was always the distinguishing feature of the religion of Christ. He now conceived the plan, no doubt under the influence of Colet and More, of turning humanistic learning to the service of religion by purifying theology and practical piety of false teaching, obscurity and superstition. This he hoped to bring about by a scientific study of sacred literature, i.e. the writings of the early Fathers and the Biblical texts themselves. He was further spurred on by his discovery of a forgotten work on the text of the Vulgate, the *Annotationes of* Lorenzo Valla (1405-1457), the scholarly secretary of Pope Nicholas V. In this book the Italian humanist had criticised numerous renderings of the Vulgate New Testament on the basis of the original Greek. At the instigation of Erasmus, the Parisian printer Badius reprinted Valla in 1505, and an important step had been taken towards Erasmus’ greatest work—the production of a critical text of the Greek New Testament.

After his return to France in 1500, Erasmus continued his study of Greek, annotating and translating and preparing himself for large-scale work on Greek texts. To this period belongs the first edition of the *Adagia,* a collection of Latin sayings from classical authors with comments. This work laid the foundation of his European reputation as a scholar. He was dogged by poverty and ill-health, and seems to have lived by teaching and lecturing. But his friends in England were always an attraction, and in 1504 he wrote to Colet announcing that he would like to return to England, that he now knew Greek and that he had already worked on Origen. On this visit, 1505-1506, he was welcomed in all learned circles as a gifted humanist, and came to know Prince Henry (later Henry VIII), William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester. He visited Cambridge and perhaps lectured on Greek there. In 1506 he visited Italy as a kind of guardian-tutor to two young Italian gentlemen and received his doctorate at Turin. At Venice he met the greatest of all the Renaissance printers, Aldus Manutius, and compiled the second, much enlarged edition of his *Adagia,* this time including Greek as well as Latin material. He also did some work on the Aldine Press editions of Plautus, Terence and the tragedies of Seneca, which were then in preparation. A visit to Rome brought with it the great temptation to accept an attractive ecclesiastical post there. Italy had priceless manuscripts in abundance, enlightened printers, congenial scholars, a friendly climate and a way of life which suited Erasmus. But he valued his intellectual freedom above all things, and the reigning Pontiff was especially repugnant to him.

Then in May, 1509, he received news of the death of Henry VII, and England became at once a land of promise. The invitation to return suggested that real reward would now accompany scholarly labours under the Prince who had grown up among the brightest stars of English humanism. So Erasmus came back to England almost at once, and there wrote his *Encomium Moriae (In Praise of Folly),* an original and biting satire on the stupidity and self-contradiction of human nature in every age and estate. In private readings the work was well received by Thomas More and his English friends, who greeted it as a brilliant and amusing piece of writing. It contained serious and damaging criticism of the Church. Scholasticism, Bishops and mendicant friars all suffer under the pen of Erasmus, and even the Curia itself is castigated. Apart from the identification of the Papacy with Antichrist, much of the scorn which Luther was to pour out on reigning abuses can be found in this early work of Erasmus. Erasmus was, of course, by no means the only humanist to attack pride, greed and obscurantism in the Church. The affair of the brilliant scholar Reuchlin is another example; it was the *cause celebre* of the world of scholarship until the Reformation overshadowed it by raising a greater issue still. Reuchlin, the most learned Hebraist of his day, found his career ruined by the anti-Semitic feeling encouraged by many in high places, the jealous ignorance of Dominican monks and the almost incredible prejudice of decadent scholastic theologians. The humanists were at one in deploring the efforts of a converted Jew named Pfefferkorn to have all Jewish writings, apart from the Old Testament, confiscated and destroyed. When the question was examined, Reuchlin alone of the authorities consulted had stood for preserving most, if not all the Hebrew writings. In consequence, he became the butt of constant attack, especially from the Dominicans, over a period of several years. A group of humanists, Ulrich von Hutten, Crotus Rubeanus and others, came to Reuchlin’s aid with a scurrilous best-seller, the anonymous *Epistolae Obscurorum Virorum* (1515-1517). In these letters, the obscurantists are belaboured with every weapon in the satirist’s armoury. The coarseness of tone which disfigures the German humanists’ work is in marked contrast to the delicate mockery of Erasmus’ wit. The *Praise of Folly* was first printed in Paris in 1511, and almost at once became the favourite reading of the day. It ran through many editions, Aldus produced one in 1515 with illustrations by the great Holbein, which must have increased its circulation still further. During the latter part of this, the last stay of any length he was to have in England (1509-1514), Erasmus lectured in Greek at Cambridge for about three years, working also in Queens’ College at the letters of Jerome and his Greek text of the New Testament whenever he had the opportunity. But Cambridge did not agree with him. He seems to have had little interest in the other teachers and scholars of the town or in his lecturing work, for he was not there long enough to have a hand in radically reshaping the curriculum. The food, the wine and the climate disgusted him, and brought on renewed attacks of the stone, to which he had been susceptible for some years previously. Had it not been for the plague in London and the politically troubled state of the Continent, he would have left sooner. He began to long for Italy and finally left England in July, 1514, in spite of efforts from the highest quarters to induce him to remain. An attempt was made at about this time to reclaim him for the monastery which he had entered as a youth. But the warlike Julius II had been replaced as Pope by Leo X, a good friend of Erasmus. From him he procured not only official release from the vows he made when he first joined the Augustinian order, but also official blessing on his great enterprise now in hand—the production of a new Latin translation of the New Testament, based on a critical study of all the Greek texts available.

After leaving England, Erasmus found that his journey across Europe was something like a triumphal progress. Scholars and dignitaries welcomed him as he went from Hammes (near Calais) through Ghent, Antwerp, Louvain, Liege, Mainz and Strasburg to Basel. This was to be the headquarters of all his future activities. Here was a congenial climate, a liberally minded University and a very great printer—Johann Froben, with whom the name of the great Dutch humanist will always be associated.

Erasmus was now a man of unsurpassed learning. No man in Europe could rival him in reading and writing the classical tongues. No man had such mastery of the treasures of ancient literature, both secular and patristic. No man commanded the ear of Pope, cardinal and king as did Erasmus. To the thoughtful Christian, troubled over the state of Christendom, no one seemed more suited to lead the work of reforming the corrupt and worldly spirit of the Roman Church and of purifying its debased religious practice. And when the *Novum Instrumentum* began to come from Froben’s presses in 1516, it must have seemed to many as if the reforming work was beginning indeed.

The New Testament of Erasmus was the first and perhaps the greatest step in the story of Biblical textual criticism. But besides the Greek and Latin texts, there were outspoken annotations and paraphrases, which did not fail to point out the contemporary relevance of the sacred word. As edition followed edition, these notes became fuller and even more pointed.[^1] The results could not but be far-reaching and profound. As Froude put it in his forceful way: ‘The living facts of Christianity, the persons of Christ and the Apostles, their history, their lives, their teaching were revealed to an astonished world. For the first time the laity were able to see, side by side, the Christianity which converted the world, and the Christianity of a Church with a Borgia Pope, cardinal princes, ecclesiastical courts and a mythology of lies. The effect was to be a spiritual earthquake.’[^2]

It was to be expected that the *Praise of Folly* and the *Novum Testamentum* (as the *Novum Instrumentum* was later called) would make enemies for Erasmus. The worldly wisdom of Folly, with the delicate rapier of her wit, pointed in precisely the same direction as the scholarly and serious notes on the New Testament. The clergy were more or less antagonised *en bloc.* Monks and friars protested in all quarters and began plotting the downfall of Erasmus. Universities, including Oxford and Cambridge, proscribed all his writings. Many attributed all the trouble to Humanistic scholarship itself, and were further confirmed in the obscurantist views which had been so pitifully displayed in the Reuchlin affair. Sir Thomas More defended Erasmus, and he was not alone. But at that time Erasmus needed no protection. His reputation was high in learned circles, the Pope (to whom the *Novum Instrumentum* was dedicated) was on his side, and the political powers of the Empire, France and England were favourable to him. Erasmus was not moved and continued to call for reform. The Pope, thought Erasmus, should lead the Bishops in a new peaceful crusade to correct abuses, to encourage preaching, reading of the Scriptures and holy living in accordance with the simple teachings of Christ, and to put down superstition and corruption by banishing ignorance.

But it was not to be. Vested interests—or, to put it more bluntly, as Luther did, lust for money, pleasure and power— had too great a hold on and in the system for an Erasmian reform to be even attempted. Nor could Erasmus see that the abuses in the Church were supported and buttressed by a whole theology, and unless a return to the New Testament teaching on grace, faith and salvation could be obtained, no really effective reform of the corrupt life of Christendom could be accomplished. Indulgences would go only when the power of the keys at Rome went, and the power of Rome would go only when the New Testament doctrine of grace was re-established.

Erasmus was no theologian. Theology did not interest him—he had been sickened of Aquinas and Scotus, for he had seen the barren intellectualism and spiritual poverty to which scholasticism led, and he knew of no alternative. Furthermore he was a man of peace, a scholar above all—and scholarship can only be fruitfully pursued if peace and order are preserved. Human nature and practical matters he analysed with penetrating acumen—from his desk. He had a conservative turn of mind, for all his clear-sightedness, and to him the revolutionary was more to be feared than the ignorant devotee of an old but corrupt system. His reforming ideals were based on an undog-matic Christianity, an eviscerated Christianity precisely because it was a Christianity without Christ at the deepest level. The epigram is irresistible—Erasmus was shrewd but shallow, a man of cool calculation rather than of burning conviction. He could never stand *contra mundum.*

The first edition of the Greek New Testament appeared in 1516. The next year an Augustinian monk nailed ninety-five propositions for discussion to the door of the church of Wittenberg in Saxony. And the nails in the door of the cathedral church were like nails in the coffin of an Erasmian reform.

## II. Luther to 1517

Martin Luther was born in Saxony in 1483, and was thus at least fourteen years younger than Erasmus. When he was one year old, the family moved from Eisleben (Thuringia) to Mansfeld; he was at school there, then at Magdeburg for one year (at a Brethren school) and then at Eisenach. He was an intelligent boy, he studied and learned well, his health was good and his disposition cheery. At the famous University of Erfurt, where he matriculated in 1501, he was soon renowned for his ability in debate and philosophical studies. He worked hard, played the lute and sang in his spare time, and passed his examinations quickly and easily, becoming a Bachelor of Arts in 1502 and a Master in 1505. But Martin Luther was not always cheerful company. He was troubled over the state of his soul, and unsure of his standing before God. The insecurity of human life was strikingly brought home to him by the death of a special friend during the examination for the M.A. degree, and by a narrow escape only a few months later when Luther himself was nearly killed by lightning during a storm. ‘Like everyone else in the Middle Ages he knew what to do about his plight. The Church taught that no sensible person would wait until his deathbed to make an act of contrition and plead for grace. From beginning to end the only secure course was to lay hold of every help the Church had to offer: sacraments, pilgrimages, indulgences, the intercession of the saints. Yet foolish was the man who relied solely on the good offices of the heavenly intercessors if he had done nothing to ensure their favour! And what better could he do than take the cowl? . . . Monasticism was the way *par excellence* to heaven.’[^3] Thus, to save his soul, Martin Luther, the promising young law student, became a monk. His father was furious, but on July 17th, 1505, Martin was accepted as a novice at the monastery of the Erfurt Augustinians. Here, in spite of fasting, scourging, the minutest self-examination and every form of self-discipline known to the strict order he had joined, he failed to find peace. The awful consciousness of the majesty and holiness of God which almost crushed him as he celebrated his first mass (in May, 1507) never completely left him. He was tormented by the recognition of his own sin, and by the question, ‘Have I fasted, watched, prayed, confessed *enough?’*

His theological studies were no help to him in this predicament, for the Nominalist scholastic teaching—a more recent synthesis than that of Aquinas, founded on the work of Occam —served rather to increase his despair. Occam and his disciple Gabriel Biel taught that man could, of his own free will unaided by grace, choose to do what was morally good and avoid what was morally evil, follow and enjoy the Divine commands and ‘of his own natural powers love God above all things.’[^4] This Luther knew to be contrary to the state of affairs in his own heart and mind. A journey to Rome in 1510 brought no relief. At Rome, Erasmus had found learning and culture, and though he could not but be conscious of the mercenary motives, lax morality and superstition around him, he had enjoyed himself. At Rome, Luther was blind to all the treasures *of* man’s art; he saw only the monstrous organisation steeped in worldliness and corruption, purporting nevertheless to be the religion of Christ on earth. He did all that a pious pilgrim should do. But his bewilderment and dissatisfaction increased, and nothing could give him lasting comfort when he thought of God as his Judge. He knew he deserved condemnation and hell. The Vicar-General of the Order in Germany, Johann von Staupitz, spent much time with Luther in his spiritual torment. He could not fully understand the young monk’s difficulties, but he gave him some wise advice. He seems to have shifted the emphasis from sins to sin, from acts to the very nature of man, and at the same time to have suggested to Luther that *poenitentiam agere* in Matt. 4.17 meant ‘to be repentent in the heart’ rather than ‘to do the prescribed acts of penance,’ which was the standard interpretation. Staupitz was a man of real faith with a strong leaning towards mystical religion, and Lindsay affirms that he spoke to Luther concerning personal trust in God, the righteousness of Christ which is accessible to faith, and similar topics.[^5] Be that as it may, Luther found no lasting peace, though he began to see certain things more clearly. But by far the most valuable thing that Staupitz did was to tell Luther that he should study for his Doctor’s degree, undertake preaching and Bible study and finally assume the chair of Theology at the new University of Wittenberg. In 1508, the young monk had begun to lecture there in Aristotelian logic and ethics; after his journey to Rome, however, he transferred to Wittenberg and began to study Augustine and Bernard, as well as continuing his Biblical studies. In 1512 he graduated as Doctor of the Holy Scripture and three weeks later succeeded Staupitz as Professor of Theology.

On August 16th, 1513, the young Professor began his first series of lectures. The subject was the Psalms. When he began his exposition he was still not clear as to how a sinner could be received by a Holy God; “When I became a Doctor, I did not yet know that we cannot expiate our sins,” he said later.[^6] But during these lectures (the exact date will probably never be known[^7]) the light broke through the mists of doubt and despair caused by scholastic theology, ignorance and personal soul-anguish. Martin Luther discovered that *thejustitia Dei of* which the Bible speaks is not exclusively retributive justice, the righteous wrath which is all that sinful man deserves at the hand of his Creator. The righteousness of God is also a gift, springing from His mercy and made ours by faith in Christ. This is a ‘passive justice’ which we cannot attain by striving or merit. It is offered to us freely in the Gospel of Christ. This is the doctrine of justification by faith, the heart of Luther’s theology. When he finished his lectures on the Psalms in 1515, his heart and mind were assured on this vital issue. And in his lectures on the Epistle to the Romans (1515-1516) the teaching is clear. He knew now the meaning of Rom. 1.17. Luther had grasped the essentials of the character of God, the mediatorial work of Christ and the nature of faith as revealed in the New Testament. He was to develop these great Biblical insights, but never to change them, and they form the basis of all his controversy, exposition, preaching and piety. But, like Erasmus, he could not but compare what he had found in the New Testament with contemporary Christendom. Thus, it could not be long before he collided with the official doctrine and practice of the Church.

Significantly enough, it was a practical issue which marked the beginning of the break. As well as being a professor and a theologian, Luther was a pastor and a preacher ministering to a congregation—that of the Castle Church at Wittenberg. His people knew that there was never a man farther removed from the dry academic than Dr. Martin. His teaching was vital, personal and compelling. The light he had gained from the Scriptures forced him to live by and preach the truth which he had found. The same was true when he applied his doctrine to his congregation. He knew eternity was in the balance every time he preached to his sturdy Saxon audience. To safeguard them he might have to protest, to say unpopular and even objectionable things. But he could do no other in all honesty, for immortal souls were under his care, and he was responsible to God for their welfare. Thus in 1516 he felt constrained to preach three times against indulgences.

Indulgences had been a permanent part of the Roman system for at least 400 years before Luther’s time, though there had never been complete agreement as to what exactly they effected. The great mediaeval schoolmen Bonaventura and Aquinas had supported indulgences and integrated them into their theological systems. The Council of Trent was further to confirm their use after the Reformation.[^8] Though not originally a Papal prerogative, the power of granting indulgences had gradually come to be regarded as confined to the Pope, and anyone to whom he might delegate it. Strictly (though this was far from being clearly understood in Luther’s time) an indulgence is a remission of all or part of the *temporal* punishments due to the sinner for his sin. Confession to, and absolution by a priest secure the removal of the *guilt* and *eternal* punishment of the baptized sinner. But temporal punishments still remain. These are in part imposed by the priest as penances to be executed in this life, and in part the sufferings in Purgatory after death, more or less according to the extent and nature of the sins committed in earthly life. But in tjie popular mind there was naturally no distinction between the guilt and the penalty of sin, or between the temporal and the eternal nature of the punishments due. “Indulgences save you” was the universal conviction of mediaeval Europe. Generally speaking, the more you paid, the greater were the punishments remitted. The abuses were obvious. Indulgences were granted to raise armies for Papal wars, to build churches and cathedrals, and to attract new members for religious orders. They were granted to those who visited shrines where holy relics were preserved. By visiting the Wittenberg collection of Luther’s own prince, Frederick the Wise, and making the stipulated contributions to the Church there on All Saints’ Day, a man might receive from the pope “indulgences for the reduction of purgatory, either for themselves or for others, to the extent of 1,902,202 years and 270 days.”[^9] Luther was certain of one thing—forgiveness depends on true interior contrition; the God-man relationship is determined by the state of man’s soul towards God himself, whatever else may be true of his relation to the Church and to earthly penalties.

In 1517, as a result of a bargain struck between Pope Leo X, who needed money for the completion of the new St. Peter’s at Rome, and Albert of Brandenburg, the young German prince-bishop who wanted to add the Archbishopric of Mainz to his other titles, a plenary indulgence was proclaimed in Brandenburg by an experienced salesman, the Dominican friar Tetzel. Part of the money raised was to be used to repay the moneylenders from whom Albert had borrowed in order to pay the Pope for his appointment to the empty see, and part would go towards the building of St. Peter’s directly. The indulgence proclaimed that all who contributed would enjoy perfect remission of all sins and reconciliation with God, and would be completely out of danger from purgatory. Luther’s own parishioners were marching across the border from Wittenberg and buying these indulgences. On October 31st, Luther decided that the matter should be publicly aired. The following day, Frederick would be selling his own indulgence in Wittenberg itself. On the eve of All Saints’ Luther preached a sermon on indulgences and the grace of God. The same day he nailed to the door of the Castle Church 95 propositions in Latin for debate. They are crisp, clearly reasoned, easily grasped and forthright in their denial of any Papal power to remit spiritual punishment. Luther writes now in righteous anger, now with the gentlest irony. Indulgences are positively harmful, according to the *Ninety-Five Theses,* since they induce a false assurance of peace, and cause the recipients to neglect true repentance. The Gospel, not the accumulated merits of the saints, is the true glory and treasure of the Church. The money given for indulgences would be far better spent on the poor at home than on a splendid church in Rome. Luther was only asking for theological disputation, official definition and the correction of abuses. But students copied the theses, translated them and took them to printers. Within two weeks they were known all over Germany, and throughout Europe in as many months.[^10]

## III. Luther and Erasmus from 1517

From 1517 onwards, the relationship between Erasmus and Luther was a matter of great interest and speculation to men of letters, theologians, bishops and princes. As early as 1502 in his *Enchiridion* Erasmus had declared his distaste for dogmatic theology, and Luther was above all a theologian. Yet the older man was noted for his mocking attacks on the corruption of many parts of the ecclesiastical system, his rather loose connection with the Church and his reputation as a leading critic and proposer of reforms. Many anticipated that the outspoken young Saxon and the cool clear-thinking Lowlander would join forces. For three years after the *Ninety-Five Theses* it was by no means obvious that the two ideals of reform before the Church —the ways of peaceful (albeit undoctrinal) humanism and of revolutionary Augustinian evangelicalism—were utterly incompatible. As an example of this we may note the position of the Lutheran elite (as Mesnard has called them), men like Spalatin, Melanchthon and Justus Jonas, who were all close friends and admirers of Erasmus. The fact that the break eventually came clearly revealed the primacy of theology in Luther’s thought and activity. Erasmus regarded theology as the bugbear of the Church’s life.

Writing to Spalatin in October, 1516,[^11] Luther had remarked that he considered Augustine the greatest exegetical writer and Jerome a poor second. Erasmus would have reversed the order. Erasmus followed Jerome in interpreting the justification by works against which Paul writes as merely justification by outward ceremonial observance. Luther, believing that any kind of effort or contribution man may attempt to make towards his own salvation is works-righteousness, and therefore under condemnation, preferred the thorough-going exegesis of Augustine, who magnifies the grace of God. If the person is changed, then—and only then—will the good works follow. Such was Luther’s position. We find outlined in this letter the foundations of the cleavage which was to become explicit and irreparable with *The Bondage of the Will.* In March, 1517, he w**rote to** the Augustinian Johann Lang[^12] that he found himself liking Erasmus less and less, since the latter tended to value human opinions above divine things and failed to make much of Christ and of grace. Perhaps to anticipate and answer the charge of presumption in criticising so great a figure, Luther added that a man is not made a truly wise Christian because he is a good Greek and Hebrew scholar. But he had by no means given up hope of what Erasmus might become, for he concludes the letter by saying that he is keeping his opinion of Erasmus secret, so as not to lend strength to his enemies, and he trusts that God will enlighten Erasmus in His own good time. Writing again to Spalatin early in November,[^13]Luther again shows how deeply he felt the difference of attitude. He describes a dialogue of Erasmus he has just read thus: ‘It is so agreeably, learnedly and wittily put together, that is, so thoroughly Erasmian in fact, that it compels one to smile and jest on the subject of the faults and misfortunes of the church of Christ, which, however it is every Christian’s duty to deplore before God in deepest grief.’

In the summer of 1518 Philip Melanchthon, a gentle young scholar of immense learning, arrived in Wittenberg to teach Greek. He had been—and was to remain—a respected friend of Erasmus, and many must have hoped that he would bring Luther to a milder opinion of Erasmus. In 1518 Luther’s name first begins to appear in the voluminous correspondence of Erasmus. In general he affirms that Luther has done and said much that is good, but that his rough manner will lose him many friends. If nothing else, it seems that the German reformer has at least turned people back to examine the fathers for themselves. Concerning particular doctrines maintained by Luther, Erasmus is discreetly vague. About the same time, however, he seems to have cautioned his printer Froben of Basel against bringing out works by Luther.[^14] Erasmus also corresponded with Johann Lang, a respected friend in German humanist circles. Writing to Lang on October 17th, 1518,[^15] he states that Luther’s views were approved by the best men and mentions the universal welcome that the *Ninety-Five Theses* had found. “As the chair of Roman Pontiff stands today,” he goes on, “it is the plague of Christendom.”

In the following year, 1519, the rapprochement between Erasmus and Luther was probably as close as it could ever be. In January, Melanchthon wrote to Erasmus:[^16] ‘Martin Luther is your convinced admirer and would like your approval.’ But those who hated Erasmus were also at work. His inveterate enemies were the Dominican and Carmelite monks at Louvain, and one of them now struck a shrewd blow. In a lecture on St. Paul, a certain Egmond bracketed Luther with Erasmus as two men who both needed converting, after which they might both become warriors of the true faith. It was not long before the foes of humanism—and they were many—were maintaining that Erasmus was the father of Luther’s heresy, that he had helped Luther with his writings and that the German movement with all its revolutionary and anarchical possibilities was the result of too much Greek and Hebrew. By using Luther as a stick to beat Erasmus, the opposition hoped to discredit him if he remained silent, or to drive him into the Reformer’s camp, where he could clearly be seen as a heretic. Nor was it only his enemies who sought to align him with Luther. A letter dated March 28th[^17] arrived from Luther himself, asking for support in friendly and respectful terms. The request was a difficult one. Luther was acclaimed by his order, as the chapter meeting at Heidelberg in April, 1518, had shown, and hailed by his fellow countrymen as a deliverer from Italian tyranny. He had many followers among the ranks of the humanists. He had the respect and the protection of Frederick, one of the most powerful of the Electors. Cajetan, the Papal legate in Germany, had opposed Luther in Augsburg in October of the previous year, ordering him to recant and to be silent, but was generally held to have acted in a high-minded and peremptory manner. The printed account of the discussion only served further to alienate support for the Papal cause. Erasmus could see things developing into a clash which would certainly involve passionate disputation, and probably heresy trials and all the persecution and hatred which he so much deplored. For Erasmus, to side openly with Luther would certainly be to antagonise the Pope, and the Pope’s friendship and protection were of inestimable value to him. Largely as a result of Papal favour, he enjoyed a unique position in Europe, able to say and write what he liked and as he liked. Erasmus did not reply to Luther at once. But when on April 14th he had occasion to write to Frederick of Saxony, Luther’s prince, he spoke generously.[^18] He did not know Luther and he had not read his works, so he was not concerned to praise or blame any particular doctrines or opinions. But everyone knows, continued Erasmus, that Luther’s life is pure, free from ambition and covetousness; so where is the Christian mercy of those who shout for his blood ? Luther is willing to discuss and be proved wrong if his opponents can produce satisfactory evidence to refute his views. It is the prince’s duty to protect the pious, and not to allow an innocent man to fall into the hands of the ungodly under the pretext of religion. And I notice, he concluded, that those who read Luther’s books most avidly here are the best men. This letter was soon published in Leipzig, where a ready sale was assured in view of the forthcoming disputation. This guarded siding with Luther must have had a considerable effect, in spite of the fact that it was not to be a lasting alliance. Nevertheless, Erasmus was always careful to leave a way of escape open, and on the 22nd of the same month he wrote to Melanchthon that he had not read any of Luther’s works.[^19] And in a letter to Wolsey of May 18th he is careful to say that he has read only an odd page or two *(unam aut alteram pagellam)* of Luther, and has not had time to read more.[^20] Then on May 30th he replied to Luther directly.[^21] It was a friendly letter, advising caution and restraint. Luther should not attack the Pope or princes, but rather abuses of power, for ancient institutions cannot be uprooted in a moment. Paul did away with Jewish law by turning it all into an allegory! He admits to having glanced at Luther’s Commentary on the Psalms and found it good. Luther should persevere, but take care not to start a faction. Above all he counsels coolness, courtesy and moderation. The letter does Erasmus credit in many ways, but it shows that he had not yet fully grasped the issues at stake. Luther’s friends immediately published this letter,[^22] hoping to force Erasmus to identify himself completely with them. But this was not to be.

In June and July, 1519, Luther, with others of the Wittenberg faculty, disputed with the controversialist Eck at Leipzig. The first debate was between Carlstadt and Eck on the freedom of the will, the second between Luther and Eck on the primacy of the Pope. Luther was now sure that this doctrine was absent from Scripture, unknown to the Fathers and based on fraudulent decretals. Eck cunningly sought to involve Luther in arguments which would lead to his ranging himself with opinions already pronounced heretical by the Church—the teachings of Wycliffe, the Waldensians and in particular John Hus (r. 1370-1415), the Bohemian reformer burned at Constance. When Luther hesitatingly admitted, after a little reflection and research into the opinions condemned at Constance, that some of Hus’ views were scriptural and blameless, there was sufficient evidence to have him safely declared a heretic. A Papal Bull would certainly follow to this effect. Luther had been forced to see that his blow against indulgences and his teachings on grace involved a fundamental opposition to the Roman system. In September his Exposition of the Epistle to the Galatians appeared at Leipzig, and showed that Luther was both a scholarly exegete and an accurate and unashamed opponent of Rome. In the following month, in a letter to Albert, Cardinal Archbishop of Mainz,[^23] Erasmus again states his carefully chosen position in the Luther affair: I do not know him; I have only had time to glance at his books; I have advised him to be moderate; I am neither his patron nor his accuser; all the world knows him to be a person of good character; certain theologians can only shriek heretic and never indicate where Luther is wrong. In view of the publication of his private letter of May 30th to Luther this disclaimer is by no means ungenerous. But Erasmus makes a further point which seems to indicate that he has taken particular interest in certain aspects of Luther’s case. There are things which Luther maintains and which are decried as heresy which can be found in the writings of Augustine and Bernard. The bloodthirsty, avaricious mendicant friars have taken on more than they realised. Luther should be given a fair hearing. In this letter to the most powerful prelate in all Germany Erasmus makes an outspoken and fair-minded protest against injustice to Luther which cannot but command our admiration.

The year 1520 was decisive. During its course came Luther’s final breach with Rome, both in person and in print, while at the same time Erasmus began to see how deep was the gulf which separated his own position from that of the German reformer. Luther recognised the value of printed propaganda, and sermons, expositions, pamphlets and open letters began to pour from his fluent pen. The more sure he became of his position, the more outspoken were his tracts. In May appeared a *Sermon on Good Works.* The following month Erasmus wrote to Melanchthon[^24]admitting that perhaps offences had to come, but that he (Erasmus) would not be one of those who caused them. Erasmus reports that most people wish that Luther had written with more courtesy and moderation, but none the less he is able to inform Melanchthon that he has advised Wolsey against the burning of Luther’s books,[^25] and sends friendly greetings to the Reformer and his friends. In July, writing to Spalatin,[^26] Erasmus affirms it to be his prayer that Christ will moderate Luther’s style and spirit. Truth may not always be spoken; much depends on how it is proclaimed. But on June 15th, the Bull for which Eck had laboured had been issued at Rome—*Exsurge Domine.* In August appeared Luther’s *Address to the German Nobility—*a work which was distributed and sold at a phenomenal rate. It was an appeal to the new Emperor and the princes—a vigorous, far-sighted and comprehensive scheme of reform. It attacked Papal supremacy in the matters of temporal power and Biblical interpretation, asserted the priesthood of all believers and the right of any Christian to summon a General Council, and spoke strongly against the corruption of the Curia. As well as advocating a national German Church and a German ecclesiastical council, Luther pressed for a reduction of the mendicant orders, of pilgrimages and of holy days, and for a married priesthood to put an end to the disgraceful concubinage so general among the clergy of the day. Sadly apprehensive, Erasmus wrote to Gerard Geldenhauer on September 9th:[^27] ‘If only Luther had followed my advice. . . . I shall not become mixed up in this tragic affair.’ A few days later he felt it necessary to write to the Pope himself.[^28] Gracefully, and without stating a blunt refusal, he declines the offer of a bishopric if he will write against Luther. He disclaims any connection with Luther in most submissive terms. He had not written against Luther because he was ignorant of his theology and had not been able to find the time for the task. All he had done was to advise moderation, and his friendly letter had been written two years earlier, before the quarrel had become embittered. He had never defended Luther’s opinions. Then in October the most decisive of all Luther’s writings to date appeared: *On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church.* In this work he attacks the elaborate system of the seven sacraments and reduces them to three—the Lord’s Supper, Baptism and Penance. He denies the doctrine of transubstantiation with its teachings that the priest “makes God” and “offers God.” The cup of communion should be given to the laity, who receive Christ by faith, not *ex opere operate.* The book also contains an important and controversial discussion of marriage and divorce which shows Luther grappling courageously with the thornier problems of Christian ethics. The heart of the Roman system had been attacked. The reaction throughout Germany was almost instantaneous. It was a fateful step which cost Luther innumerable supporters,[^29] and gave the opposing front a real solidarity, as Meissinger has pointed out.[^30] But it was at least clear now what Luther’s objective was. Thus, when the Bull *Exsurge* was brought across the Alps by Aleander and Eck late in October, Luther had burned his boats behind him. A few weeks later, however, there appeared a little work remarkably free from the bitterness and controversy of this fateful year— *The Freedom of a Christian Man—*in which Luther shows the centrality of faith in Christian experience and in the right use of sacrament and ceremonial. The work restates the priesthood of all believers and the possessions of the Christian man through faith in such impressive terms that it made a most useful manual of private devotion, and as such it enjoyed considerable popularity.

But Erasmus found himself involved in the dispute once more before the year 1520 was out. In October Luther’s prince, Frederick the Wise, had set out for Aix to attend the crowning of the new Emperor, the young Charles V, but had been delayed at Cologne until November by an attack of gout. The Papal nuncio Aleander arrived, bearing the Bull and a Papal brief demanding the burning of Luther’s writings and the handing over of Luther in person as a captive. Frederick asked for time to consider the matter, and sent for Erasmus, who was also in Cologne at the time. When asked what Luther’s real offence was, Erasmus is reported to have said: “He has sinned greatly; he has attacked the monks in their belly and the Pope in his crown.” The account, presumably due to Spalatin who was present, also reports the comment of the nonplussed Elector on Erasmus, ‘An amazing fellow! You never know what to expect of him.’[^31] Back in his lodgings, Erasmus complied with Frederick’s request for a confidential written memorandum on the matter. He handed to Spalatin a sheet on which twenty pregnant sentences were written.[^32] The burden of these ‘Axioms’ is as follows. The affair is more serious than many believe. Luther is honest and well-intentioned; his enemies are actuated by evil motives. The cruelty of the Bull is unworthy of a representative of Christ; the Pope should not allow himself to be imposed upon, but prefer the honour of Christ to his own, and the winning of souls to any other gain. It would be better to strive for caution and restraint, to avoid rash haste and to put the matter before a court of enquiry made up of honest and unbiased scholars. Frederick’s answer to Aleander was based on this advice. Before this confidential document was returned to Erasmus at his own urgent request, a copy was made of it, which found its way to the University of Wittenberg. Soon afterwards it was mysteriously printed in Leipzig, and Erasmus found himself further compromised. On December ioth, Luther burned the Papal bull in public at Wittenberg, together with the Decretals on which the doctrine of Papal authority was founded.

On January 22nd, 1521, the new Emperor Charles V opened his first Imperial Diet at Worms. As King of Spain, he had had domestic matters to attend to between the time of his election (June, 1519) and his coronation (October), but now the Lutheran heresy was to come before him at Worms. The Papal envoy, Aleander, armed with the Bull of excommunication, simply aimed at having Luther condemned unheard by the secular power and handed over. The Emperor’s Spanish education and the historic mediaeval pomp of his position all tended to make him side with the Papal cause. Furthermore, war with Francis I of France was threatening, and he must not alienate Italy, where there would doubtless be fighting, and the Pope’s support was vital. Yet in his vast German territories pro-Luther feeling ran high, and the Estates—or the majority of them—asserted that there would be bloodshed if Luther were condemned without a hearing. The Germans in the Diet maintained that no man should be placed under the Imperial ban without being heard in his own defence. Under an Imperial Safe-conduct Luther came, arriving on April 16th after what Seemed like a royal progress through the German villages. The next day he was shown his books, asked whether they were his, ftnd ordered to recant them all. He asked for time and the sitting was postponed until the following day, when on his re-appearance he attempted to maintain a distinction between his various works, and to secure a debate from Scripture on them. This was refused and he was peremptorily ordered to fecant. Already he had spoken at greater length than the Emperor and Aleander had intended. Luther answered that ; Unless convinced by Scripture or plain *reason* he *could not* recant, for Popes and Councils were fallible and had contradictory voices, while his own conscience was captive to the Word of God alone. The main hearing was over, and private conference in the succeeding days could effect no solution or even a compromise. Luther left Worms, for his safe-conduct was to expire in 21 days, after which he would be liable to seizure and the death penalty. On the return journey to Wittenberg he disappeared. Rumour ran throughout Germany that he was dead, and that the unscrupulous Aleander had poisoned him. In fact he had been secretly taken to the Wartburg, one of Frederick’s castles, there to spend several months in disguise, thinking, studying and above all beginning his German translation of the Bible. Meanwhile the Imperial edict against Luther’s writings was openly flouted throughout Germany and the Lowlands. Alike in Imperial free cities and peasant villages the new doctrines were preached and received, the pamphlets—many of them with vigorous woodcut cartoons —sold in vast numbers, and the hatred of Roman doctrine increased.

Aleander was a sworn enemy of Erasmus, and always hoped to involve the Dutchman in Luther’s condemnation. (In a dispatch to Rome dated February 8th, 1521, he called Erasmus ‘the great cornerstone of the Lutheran heresy.’) Further pressure was exerted on Erasmus by popular sentiment at the time of the Diet, Albrecht Diirer being among those who hoped to see Erasmus champion Luther. But Erasmus was too moderate to be able to affect the Emperor one way or another, even had he attempted it. On May 14th he confessed that the evil now seemed to him to be incurable.[^33] On the 24th, writing to William Warham,[^34] Archbishop of Canterbury, he comments, ‘It’s all up with that spark of gospel love, that tiny star of gospel light’ *[ Actum est de scintilla caritatis evangelicae, actum est de stellula lucis evangelicae]—*showing apparently genuine regret at what seemed to him to be imminent—the burning of Luther. Again to Warham on August 23rd[^35] he mentions that certain people are urging him to write something against Luther. It would be useful, and he seems to be looking forward to the task. Meanwhile, in the Wartburg, away from the moderating influence of Melanchthon and free to re-think the whole of his theology according to the Word of God, Luther realised that he would ultimately be drawn into conflict with Erasmus. In a letter to Spalatin dated September 9th[^36] he remarked that Erasmus does not aim at the Cross, but only strives for peace. Which was true, as Erasmus himself testified in other letters of the same year. To Louvain he wrote,[^36] T have opposed the pamphlets of Luther more than any other man *(sic)*, not because he does not give good advice, but because I realise it is better to keep a respectable silence than to attempt a remedy by questionable means *(sinistre),’* and to Mountjoy,[^38] ‘Even if Luther had written all things truly, his disruptive lack of restraint *(seditiosa libertas)* would displease me greatly. I for my part would prefer to be deceived in a good many things rather than to fight for the truth in so great a universal tumult.’ Not that Erasmus was ignorant of the awful dilemma posed by Luther. Almost any solution seemed to be a bad one. In the humanist’s letters of 1520 and 1521 a constantly recurring expression is that of Scylla and Charybdis. In silencing Luther, Erasmus was certain that the authorities would go to the opposite extreme. Intransigence, bitterness and oppression would rule in the church.

Towards the end of 1521 Erasmus moved to Basel to escape the plotting and denunciation of the theologians at Louvain, and on December 1st Pope Leo X died. The new Pope, Adrian VI, was an old school friend of Erasmus, and the latter on hearing of the appointment wrote to assure him of his fidelity. Early in 1522 he dedicated his paraphrase of St. Matthew to the Emperor and it was received favourably. In December, 1522, he received a letter from Adrian[^39] saying that he had never attached much importance to the insinuations against Erasmus, and inviting him to come to Rome where he would have leisure to write against Luther. Courteously Erasmus refused both requests.[^40] He was busy with his writing and the preparation of his editions for the press. But he counsels moderation and urges Adrian to attempt real reform at Rome. In March, however, it had become known that Luther, long suspected to be in hiding, had returned to Wittenberg to quell the disturbances caused by the Zwickau prophets and the irresponsible behaviour of Carlstadt. Erasmus still maintained throughout 1522 that there should be an amnesty; burning of books should cease, heated and insulting polemical writings should be banned, and a council of serious, generous, dispassionate and independent scholars should be set up to decide what to do. But in 1523 it became obvious that he would soon have to take sides. No less a person than the King of England urged him to write against Luther,[^41] and all Europe knew that he would soon have to enter the lists in earnest. In September the new Pope was elected, and he wrote to Erasmus beseeching his help. In July the first martyrs of the Reformation had died at Brussels and events were taking an ugly turn. Erasmus never approved of this method of repression, if only because it made more Lutherans.[^42] He never ceased to deplore the situation. In a letter to Peter Barbirius in the April of this same year, he had written, ‘What Luther wrote of the tyranny, avarice and iniquity of the Roman curia—would that it were false!’[^43]Nevertheless, writing to Zwingli at the end of August[^44] he complains of Luther’s ‘riddles’ and ‘paradoxes’, listing among them the view that ‘free-will’ is an ‘empty word’ *(nomen inane).* Meanwhile, perhaps in anticipation of the entry of Erasmus into the fray, Luther had begun to mention him more freely and less sympathetically. He wrote thus to Oecolampadius, the Swiss Reformer, on the 20th June,[^45] ‘Erasmus has done that which he was destined to do. He has introduced the languages. Perhaps he will be like Moses in the land of Moab, for he does not move on into the better studies of the things which concern godliness.’ Luther goes on to explain that Erasmus had shown the world the evil of the Roman system, but was not able to show the good and lead on into the land of promise. The early Swiss Reformers had all been humanist scholars before they accepted Reformation, teaching, or found it for themselves, but though they strove to avert an open clash between Luther and Erasmus, their efforts were in vain. Writing to Henry VIII on September 4th, Erasmus announces, 'I intend to write something against the new teaching,’ and adds with grim humour, ‘but I daren’t publish it before I’ve left Germany.’[^46] We first hear of the subject in a letter to Faber of November 21st; it is ‘the little book on free-will.’[^47]

In the April of the next year, 1524, Luther wrote to Erasmus[^48]in a rather patronising tone, suggesting a truce. He almost certainly knew that Erasmus was writing against him; and so he suggested an agreement that neither of them should write against the other. He counsels Erasmus to remain a spectator of the tragedy. Luther’s language is direct, and even threatening. He thanks the humanist scholar for the pure Scriptures (his critical text of the Greek New Testament) but comments that the Reformation cause is a matter which Erasmus would do well to leave alone if he wishes to enjoy a peaceful old age. The matter is beyond his capacity now. Erasmus answered bluntness with bitterness. He replied on May 8th[^49] that he was greatly afraid that Satan might delude Luther’s mind by some device. All around him he saw broken friendships and the threat of bloody insurrection. ‘At least *I* cannot be accused of abandoning the Gospel to the passions of men,’ he commented. And on September 1st, 1524, his *Diatribe seu collatio de libero arbitrio (Discussion, or Collation, concerning Free-Will)* appeared, probably printed by Froben at Basel. Conscious of the magnitude of the step he had taken, he wrote to Henry VIII five days later:[^50] ‘The die is cast. The little book on free-will has seen the light of day.’

It is beyond all reasonable doubt that the *Diatribe* was produced as a result of the constant pressure brought to bear on Erasmus from both friends and enemies.[^51] His attempt to play the part of Gamaliel had failed.[^52] The Pope claimed his support for the old faith, princes expected it, and friends urged him to clear himself of suspicion. His enemies increased the difficulty of his position month by month by classing him as a secret Lutheran. The evidence for this is given at length by Freitag in his fine introduction to the Weimar edition of Luther’s reply). The *Diatribe* appeared without a dedication, for the public might imagine that Erasmus was writing merely for princely or papal favour, and suspect his sincerity. The subject of the work was probably also a result of outward prompting rather than inner conviction. In an important letter of February 1st, 1523,[^53] we learn that he had been accused by the Lutheran party of attributing ‘just a little bit’ *(minimum quiddam]* to free will in his paraphrase of the Epistle to the Romans when dealing with ch. 9. Then Cuthbert Tunstall, writing to Erasmus on June 5 th of the same year,[^54] had urged him to come to grips with Luther. Anticipating an objection of Erasmus, he had raised a particular issue: ‘But, you say, I have a bad reputation with Luther and the Lutherans. But no worse than God Himself, whom that fellow [i.e. Luther] makes the author of all wickedness, inasmuch as he takes away free-will from men, and roundly maintains that all things come to pass by fixed laws of necessity, so that there is no freedom for anyone if he wishes to do well.’

The work of Erasmus was well received by the Pope and the Emperor, and was praised by Henry VIII, who had himself written against Luther in 1521 and to whom Erasmus had sent a first draft before its publication.[^55] On September 30th Melanchthon wrote from Wittenberg[^56] that the work had been received there *aequissimis animis,* and there were still many points of agreement between Erasmus and Luther, though he hinted at a possibility that the quarrel might become a violent one. In fact this letter was far too optimistic and was probably a piece of wishful thinking as far as the state of affairs at Wittenberg was concerned. The general reading public—and we must not forget that the Lutheran Reformation was the first historical movement to have nation-wide printed publicity— was disappointed. The issue did not seem to be as clear cut and practical as the other matters Luther had brought up. Luther’s reply did not come at once. There was writing and action against the ‘heavenly prophets’—the fanatical extremists—to be undertaken. Then there was an outbreak of agrarian unrest such as had been common for the previous 100 years, and Luther had to make his position *vis-a-vis* the Peasants’ Rising clear, and bring what influence he could to bear in the interests of order and peace. Marriage too had brought increased responsibility and further calls on his time.

In December, 1524, two letters of Erasmus show his attitude clearly. Writing to George of Saxony, who was opposed to the Reformation, Erasmus explains that he sees Luther as one of the long line of those used by God—like Pharaoh, the Philistines, Nebuchadnezzar and the Romans—to chastise the chosen people for their own good, a necessary scourge.[^57] To Henry Stromer (Auerbach) on the 10th he writes,[^58] ‘Whatever Luther’s opinion of me may be, when it comes to a question of faith I obviously consider him of little worth.’ Erasmus is willing to grant that his opponent is an honest man, worthy of respect as far as his personal life is concerned. The qualifying clause is no small admission, in view of the way Erasmus treated most of his enemies. In December 1525, Luther’s answer finally appeared—*De Servo Arbitrio (On the Enslaved Will}.* It was four times the length of the *Diatribe[^59]* and strongly controversial in tone, considerably blunter than Erasmus had been. Luther wrote to Erasmus, apparently to explain his forceful language and to mitigate the effect he expected his work to have. Erasmus replied in a terse bitter letter of April nth, 1526.[^60]

Yet in a letter to Johann Henckel dated March 7th, 1526,[^61]while still smarting under the sting of Luther’s answer, Erasmus could partially excuse Luther’s outspokenness in his writings in view of current abuses, and even confess to having enjoyed reading some of his earlier works. Nevertheless he answered Luther in two lengthy volumes—the *Hyperaspistes* (1526 and 1527), a work bitter in tone and involved in argument. It is a personal apologia and an accusation in which Luther is depicted as the destroyer of civil, religious and cultural harmony and order. Erasmus’ resentment seems to have cooled in later years, however. Writing on Church unity in 1533 he said: ‘The freedom of the will is a thorny question which it profits little to debate; let us leave it to professed theologians. But we can agree that man of his own power can do nothing and is wholly dependent on the mercy of God; that faith is of great value, a gift of the Holy Spirit, though we may have differences of opinion as to the precise mode of its operation.’[^62] Basically, this shows little change from the attitude of the *Diatribe—*except perhaps the initial warning from a man ‘once bitten.’ The last part of the statement leaves plenty of room for the widest interpretation of the earlier part of the sentence. Luther did not trouble to reply to the *Hyperaspistes.* He did not speak of Erasmus favourably again, and there are thirty or more harsh judgments on the writer of the *Diatribe* for those who care to seek for them in Luther’s Table-talk. He saw Erasmus as an enemy of God and the Christian religion, an Epicurean and a serpent, and he was not afraid to say so.[^63] Though we may be saddened by the intrigue and the invective which disfigure the relationship of these two men, yet their literary duel deals directly and uncompromisingly with the basic principles of religion—the nature of God and the nature of men—and as such led to the production of one of the enduring monuments of evangelical doctrine, a masterpiece in the realm of polemics, dogmatics and exegesis—Martin Luther’s *De Servo Arbitrio.*

## IV. Theological Issues

*The Bondage of the Will* is the greatest piece of theological writing that ever came from Luther’s pen. This was his own opinion. Writing to Capito on July 9th, 1537, with reference to a suggested complete edition of his works, he roundly affirmed that none of them deserved preservation save the little children’s Catechism and *The Bondage of the Will*; for only they, in their different departments, were ‘right’ *(justum).[^64]*Others have agreed with Luther in giving this treatise pride of place among his theological productions. B. B. Warfield, for instance, endorsing the description of it as ‘a dialectic and polemic masterpiece,’ styles it ‘the embodiment of Luther’s reformation conceptions, the nearest thing to a systematic statement of them that he ever made ... it is ... in a true sense the manifesto of the Reformation.’[^65] And Professor Rupp quotes with approval the description of the book as ‘the finest and most powerful Soli Deo Gloria to be sung in the whole period of the Reformation.’[^66] In its fertility of thought, its vigour of language, its profound theological grasp, its sustained strength of argument and the grand sweep of its exposition, it stands unsurpassed among Luther’s writings. It is the worthiest representative of his mature thought that he has left us, and is a far finer memorial of his theological prowess than are the smaller tracts of the preceding years, which are so much better known.

Its character stands out in relief when we compare it with the booklet to which it is a reply. Erasmus’ Diatribe is elegant and gracefully written, but for all that it is by no means a significant production. There is ample evidence, as we have seen, that Erasmus had no desire to write it and no particular interest in its subject. His book suggests as much. It exhibits much learning but little insight. It makes plain what its author would not have been concerned to deny—that Erasmus of Rotterdam, the learned Biblical scholar, was no theologian. It is brief and superficial. Erasmus is deliberately noncommittal on the question which he discusses. He writes on the ‘free-will’ debate, so he tells us, as a commentator and critic rather than as a contributor to it. His chief point is that it is not a very significant issue, one way or the other; and his main complaint against Luther is simply that the latter shows a defective sense of proportion in laying so much stress on an opinion which is extreme and improbable in itself and relates to a subject which is both obscure and unimportant. *The Bondage of the Will,* on the other hand, is a major treatment of what Luther saw as the very heart of the gospel. It was no mere pot-boiler, written to order; Luther welcomed the opportunity which the appearance of the Diatribe afforded for a full written discussion of those parts of his teaching which to his mind really mattered, and plunged into his subject with zest. ‘You alone,’ he tells Erasmus, ‘have attacked the real thing, that is, the essential issue. You have not worried me with those extraneous issues about the Papacy, purgatory, indulgences and such like—trifles, rather than issues—in respect of which almost all to date have sought my blood . . . you, and you alone, have seen the hinge on which all turns, and aimed for the vital spot. For that I heartily thank you; for it is more gratifying to me to deal with this issue . . .’ (p. 318). ‘Free-will’ was no academic question to Luther; the whole gospel of the grace of God, he held, was bound up with it, and stood or fell according to the way one decided it. In *The Bondage of the Will,* therefore, Luther believes himself to be fighting for the truth of God, the only hope of man; and his earnestness and energy in prosecuting the argument bear witness to the strength of his conviction that the faith once delivered to the saints, and in consequence the salvation of precious souls, is here at stake. ‘As to my having argued somewhat vigorously,’ he writes, ‘I acknowledge» my fault, if it is a fault—but no; I have wondrous joy that this witness is borne in the world of my conduct in the cause of God. May God Himself confirm this witness in the last day!’ (p. 271). It is not the part of a true theologian, Luther holds, to be unconcerned, or to pretend to be unconcerned, when the gospel is in danger. This is the explanation of what Warfield calls ‘the amazing vigour’ of Luther’s language.[^67] The gospel of God is in jeopardy; the springs of Luther’s religion are touched; the man is moved; the volcano erupts; argument pours out of him white-hot. Nowhere does Luther come closer, either in spirit or in substance, to the Paul of Romans and Galatians than in *The Bondage of the Will.*

Why did Erasmus and Luther approach the discussion of ‘free-will’ in such contrasting attitudes of mind ? The answer is not far to seek. Their divergent attitudes sprang from two divergent conceptions of Christianity. Erasmus held that matters of doctrine were all comparatively unimportant, and that the issue as to whether a man’s will was or was not free was more unimportant than most. Luther, on the other hand, held that doctrines were essential to, and constitutive of, the Christian religion, and that the doctrine of the bondage of the will in particular was the corner-stone of the gospel and the very foundation of faith. Here we are confronted with the deepest difference that there was, or could have been, between the two men; and we must say a little more about it.

Christianity, to Erasmus, was essentially morality, with a minimum of doctrinal statement loosely appended. What Erasmus professed that he desired to see in Christendom was a return to an apostolic ‘simplicity’ of life and doctrine, and this he thought could be brought about simply by eliminating the superstitions and abuses which had crept into the Church’s life over the centuries. The Reformation that Erasmus advocated was like a course of slimming; its aim was confined to the removing of unhealthy surplus fat. But what Erasmus actually advocated under the name of ‘the philosophy of Christ’ as the true, slimmed, ‘simple’ version of Christianity, turns out on inspection to be no more than a barren moralism. Erasmus recognises no organic dependence of practice upon faith. That the life which pleases God springs only from living trust in Christ as the Word of God sets Him forth—that is something that the great humanist never saw. That is why he could profess to find so little pleasure in theological dogmatizing that he would gladly side with the Sceptics whenever Scripture and the Church allowed him to do so—although, as he hastened to explain, he uniformly submitted his judgment to these authorities, whether he understood the reasons for what they ordained or not. Luther takes him severely to task for this remark, and not without justice. Erasmus cannot be acquitted of the charge of doctrinal indifferentism. His attitude was that what one believes about the mysteries of the faith does not much matter; what the Church lays down may safely be accepted, whether right or wrong; for the details of a churchman’s doctrine will not affect his living as a Christian in this world, nor his eventual destiny in the world to come. Therefore, however sure one might be that the Church was at some point wrong, one was never justified in disrupting Christendom about it (as Luther was doing); peace in the Church was of more value than any doctrine. The churchman would be wise not to bother his head about problems of doctrinal definition, but to concern himself simply with guiding his life by the moral law of Christ. In particular, the question as to whether or not man’s will is free, to Erasmus’ mind, can be ignored with perfect safety; it can have no possible bearing on a man’s endeavour to keep the law of Christ, except perhaps to distract and discourage him. Wisdom and humility alike dissuade us from prying too deeply into such an abstruse subject; and it is a sign of pride and folly when a man lays much stress upon it. The Christian church is better off without rash ventures of that sort.

Luther’s attitude was very different. To him, Christianity was a matter of doctrine first and foremost, because true religion was first and foremost a matter of faith; and faith is correlative to truth. Faith is trust in God through Jesus Christ as He stands revealed in the gospel. Accordingly, ‘assertions’— doctrinal statements embodying the contents of the gospel— are fundamental to the Christian religion. Christianity was to Luther a dogmatic religion, or it was nothing. ‘Take away assertions, and you take away Christianity,’ he writes. ‘That would be denying all religion and piety in one breath’ (p. 67). As Principal Watson emphasises, Luther’s first concern, as theologian and reformer, was with doctrine. ‘I am not concerned with the life, but with doctrines,’ he declared. This, he held, was what distinguished him from reforming spirits of earlier days. Others, who have lived before me have attacked the Pope’s evil and scandalous life, but I have attacked his doctrine.’[^68] Accordingly, Luther will have no truck with Erasmus’ conception of an undogmatic Christianity, and the humanist’s airy indifference to matters of doctrine seemed to him as essentially un-Christian as anything well could be. For the Christian ‘assertions’ were no mere hit-or-miss rationalisations of religious experience; what they contained was the revealed truth of God, recorded in Scripture for the Church’s instruction and sealed upon the believer’s heart by the saving enlightenment of the Holy Spirit. ‘The Holy Spirit is no Sceptic, and the things He has written in our hearts are not doubts or opinions, but assertions—surer and more certain than sense of life itself’ (p. 70). In particular, the denial of ‘free-will’ was to Luther the foundation of the Biblical doctrine of grace, and a hearty endorsement of that denial was the first step for anyone who would understand the gospel and come to faith in God. The man who has not yet practically and experimentally learned the bondage of his will in sin has not yet comprehended any part of the gospel; for this is ‘the hinge on which all turns,’ the ground on which the gospel rests, as Luther shows in detail in the final section of his book. Accordingly, he finds Erasmus’ lack of interest in this subject of all subjects, his cool dismissal of it as a theoretical matter of no importance, and the shallow confusions of thought which he reveals in his arguments against the will’s bondage, simply incomprehensible in a Christian man. He constantly reproaches Erasmus for not taking the debate seriously enough, and calls attention to the muddy inconsistency of his statements as proof of the charge. And this is not a case of the professional theologian throwing his weight about. What Luther voices in these passages is not the pique of the Doctor of Holy Scripture at the temerity of the Master of Good Letters in venturing on to his own private stamping ground. Luther finds Erasmus’ attitude genuinely distressing, and is deeply and unfeignedly concerned for the great humanist’s spiritual welfare. Such bored detachment from the issue ‘free-will’, such a muddled and wrong-headed approach to it, were to his mind fundamentally irreligious and in a theologian irresponsible, and could mean only one thing: that Erasmus, the oracle and monitor of Christendom, was a stranger to grace himself. Luther feels quite justified in dropping broad hints to this effect in the course of the treatise.

It will be clear from what we have said so far that the Luther whom we meet in *The Bondage of the Will* is not Luther the pamphleteer, nor Luther the (largely extempore) preacher, but Dr. Luther, the systematic theologian—and one of a high order. That Luther was a thoroughly systematic thinker is not always appreciated. His fondness for paradoxical and hyperbolic forms of statement, the hasty, uneven character of so many of his occasional writings, and the very size and variety of his total output, have tended to obscure this fact; but fact it is. Again, his unflagging polemic against the abuse ofreason has often been construed as an assault on the very idea of rational coherence in theology, whereas in fact it is aimed only at the ideal of rational autonomy and self-sufficiency in theology—the ideal of philosophers and Scholastic theologians, to find out and know God by the use of their own unaided reason. It was in her capacity as the prompter and agent of ‘natural’ theology that Mistress Reason was in Luther’s eyes the Devil’s whore; for natural theology is, he held, blasphemous in principle, and bankrupt in practice. It is blasphemous in principle, because it seeks to snatch from God a knowledge of Himself which is not His gift, but man’s achievement—a triumph of human brain-power; thus it would feed man’s pride, and exalt him above his Creator, as one who could know God at pleasure, whether or not God willed to be known by him. Thus natural theology appears as one more attempt on man’s part to implement the programme which he espoused in his original sin—to deny his creaturehood, and deify himself, and deal with God henceforth on an independent footing. But natural theology is bankrupt in practice; for it never brings its devotees to God; instead it leaves them stranded in a quaking morass of insubstantial speculation. Natural theology leads men away from the Divine Christ, and from Scripture, the cradle in which He lies, and from the *theologia crucis,* the gospel doctrine which sets Christ forth. But it is only through Christ that God wills to be known, and gives saving knowledge of Himself. He who would know God, therefore, must seek Him through the Biblical gospel. We must not expect to understand all that the gospel tells us, for the fact of Christ (that is, the achievement of our salvation by the death of the incarnate Son of God) is beyond man’s rational comprehension. That is why the gospel has always seemed foolishness to the wise men of this world. But we are not entitled to make rational comprehension the condition of credence, nor to edit and reduce God’s Word (as Luther accuses Erasmus of doing) so as to make it square with our own preconceived ideas. That, again, is to try and make man into God, for to understand all things perfectly is the prerogative of the Creator alone. And it is also to exclude faith; for the very distinguishing mark of faith is that it takes God’s word just because it is God’s word, whether or not it can at present understand it. Man’s part, therefore, is to humble his proud mind, to renounce the sinful self-sufficiency which prompts him to treat himself as the measure of all things, to confess the blindness of his corrupt heart, and thankfully to receive the enlightening Word of God. Man is by nature as completely unable to know God as to please God; let him face the fact and admit it! Let God be God! let man be man! let ruined sinners cease pretending to be something other than ruined sinners! let them realise that they lie helpless in the hand of an angry Creator; let them seek Christ, and cry for mercy. This is the point of Luther’s polemic against reason. It takes its place as a part of his all-embracing prophetic onslaught against the proud vainglory of helpless sinners who deny their own helplessness. But it has nothing to do with his conception of the theologian’s business. Luther was no foe to the ideal of systematic consistency in formulating and organising the contents of the *theologia crucis;* how could he be, when he found that ideal so clearly exemplified in Scripture itself, in the great dogmatic epistles of St. Paul? ‘Reason in the sense of logic he employed to the uttermost limits,’ says Dr. Bainton.[^69]He does so here; and we find him telling Erasmus again and again how discreditable to a theologian is such illogicality and inconsistency as that of the Diatribe. It is common to picture Luther as an incoherent and one-sided thinker whose stock-in-trade consisted of a handful of key ideas, very robust but very rough, and to contrast him with Erasmus as the cool, shrewd, balanced rationalist, who could see things steadily and whole. This was Erasmus’ own view of the matter, as the Diatribe makes plain; but a study of the debate reveals that all the incoherence was on Erasmus’ side, and that it was Luther who saw things whole, opposing Erasmus’ woolly notions with a clear, well-organised system of Biblical truth.

This, then, is the Luther whom we meet in *The Bondage of the Will:* a great-hearted Christian warrior; a thorough exegete (he wins the battle of the texts hands down); a profound systematic theologian; and above all, an unflinching defender of the grace of a sovereign God. For this was the real matter under debate. Luther and Erasmus were not arguing about, and did not disagree about, the reality or the psychology of human choice; though Erasmus did not altogether see this, and sometimes speaks as if Luther’s determinism involved a doctrine of psychological compulsion. But Luther’s denial of ‘free-will’ has nothing to do with the psychology of action. That human choices are spontaneous and not forced he knows and affirms; it is, indeed, fundamental to his position to do so. It was man’s total inability to save himself, and the sovereignty of Divine grace in his salvation, that Luther was affirming when he denied ‘free-will’, and it was the contrary that Erasmus was affirming when he maintained ‘free-will’. The ‘free-will’ in question was ‘free-will’ in relation to God and the things of God. Erasmus defined it as ‘a power of the human will by which man may apply himself to those things that lead to eternal salvation, or turn away from the same’ (p. 137). It is this that Luther denies. He does not say that man through sin has ceased to be *man* (which was Erasmus’ persistent misconception of his meaning), but that man through sin has ceased to be *good.* He has now no power to please God. He is unable to do anything but continue in sin. His salvation, therefore, must be wholly of Divine grace, for he himself can contribute nothing to it; and any formulation of the gospel which amounts to saying that God shows grace, not in saving man, but in making it possible for man to save himself, is to be rejected as a lie. The whole work of man’s salvation, first to last, is God’s; and all the glory for it must be God’s also.

This was just what Erasmus would not say. Standing in the semi-Pelagian Scholastic tradition, he champions the view that, though sin has weakened man, it has not made him utterly incapable of meritorious action; in fact, says, Erasmus, the salvation of those who are saved is actually determined by a particular meritorious act which they perform in their own strength, without Divine assistance. There is, he affirms, a power in the human will (though, admittedly, a very little power only) ‘by which man may apply himself to those things that lead to eternal salvation,’ and thereby gain merit (though, admittedly, a very little merit only). It is by this meritorious application to spiritual concerns that salvation is secured. In expounding this opinion, Erasmus echoes the Scholastic theory of a distinction between *congruent* merit *(meritum de congruo}* and *condign* merit *(meritum de condigno).* The first of these, according to the theory, was that which a man attained by what he did in his own strength *(ex puris naturalibus)* in applying himself to spiritual concerns. Its effect was to make him a fit subject for the gift of internal grace. It did not positively oblige God to give internal grace (from this point of view, it was meritorious only in a loose and improper sense); it merely removed the barrier which had hitherto stood in the way of God’s giving it, i.e. man’s unworthiness of it and his unpreparedness for it; however, it was held to be a certain fact that God in mercy gives internal grace to all who have made themselves fit subjects for it. Grace (i.e. supernatural spiritual energy) having thus been given, its recipient could use it to do works of a quality of goodness previously out of his reach, works which God was necessarily bound, as a matter of justice, to reward with further supplies of grace and, ultimately, with heavenly glory. The merit which these works secured *(condign* merit) was meritorious in the strict sense, and put the Creator under a real obligation. The purpose of the whole theory was to hold together, on the one hand, the reality of God’s freedom in giving salvation and, on the other, the reality of man’s merit in earning it: to show that God really becomes man’s debtor (because He is under obligation to reward man’s merit) while yet at the same time remaining sovereign in salvation (because He gives the grace which creates the merit freely and without obligation).

The distinction, of course, is purely verbal, and Luther sweeps it away. All ideas of merit, he insists, whatever names you give them and whatever distinctions you draw between them, come to the same thing—man performs some action independently of God which does in fact elicit a reward from God. On this basis salvation comes to man through God’s response to what man has done. Man earns his passage; man, in the last analysis, saves himself. And this is in principle Pelagianism. Erasmus had supposed that by stressing the smallness of the power which man can exercise, and of the merit which he can gain in his own strength, he was softening the offence of his Pelagian principles and moving closer to the Augustinian position, which denies all merit and ascribes salvation wholly to God. Not at all, says Luther; all that Erasmus and those whom he follows are really doing here is cheapening and debasing their own Pelagianism, by reducing the price of salvation. ‘This hypocrisy of theirs results in their valuing and seeking to purchase the grace of God at a much cheaper rate than the Pelagians. The latter assert that it is not by a feeble something within us that we obtain grace, but by efforts and works that are complete, entire, perfect, many and mighty; but our friends here tell us that it is by something very small, almost nothing, that we merit grace. Now, if there must be error, those who say that the grace of God is priced high, and account it dear and costly, err less shamefully and presumptuously than those who teach that its price is a tiny trifle, and account it cheap and contemptible’ (pp. 293fl). Tobe an inferior kind of Pelagian in this way, however, is not, as Luther points out, to approach any nearer to the Augustinian position; it is merely to advertise to the world that, in addition to holding an unwarrantably high opinion of the natural powers of man, one also holds a shockingly low opinion of the moral demands of God’s character. The semi-Pelagian compromise, says War-field, amplifying Luther’s thought at this point, ‘while remaining Pelagian in principle, yet loses the high ethical position of Pelagianism. Seeking some middle-place between grace and works and fondly congratulating itself that it retains both, it merely falls between the stools and retains neither. It depends as truly as Pelagianism on works, but reduces those works on which it nevertheless depends to a vanishing point.’[^70] Pure Pelagianism is bad enough, for it tells us that we are able to earn our salvation, and this is to flatter man; but semi-Pela-gianism is worse, for it tells us that we need hardly do anything to earn our salvation, and that is to belittle salvation and to insult God.

But, says Luther, no form of Pelagianism can be true, for two reasons. In the first place, fallen man *in puris naturalibus* can do nothing but sin. He is a member of Satan’s kingdom and in all his actions is under Satan’s sway. His reason *(ratio)* is blinded; his will *(voluntas)* is hostile to God; he wants only to sin, and his choice *(arbitrium)* is thus always sinful. No possibility of merit exists for him, therefore; all that he does is sinfully motivated and deserves the just judgment of God. The deepest truth about him is that his *arbitrium,* his power and exercise of choice, is *enslaved*—to sin and Satan; and his natural condition is one of total inability to merit anything other than wrath and damnation.

But there is a deeper reason why the doctrine of merit, in all its shapes and forms, must be rejected. The idea of a *meritorious* act is an idea of an *independent* act which is in no way necessitated by God for man or performed by God in man, but is carried out by man acting in some sense apart from God. And there is no such action as this in God’s universe. The Creator directly energises and controls all the acts of His creatures. All events are necessitated by His immutable, sovereign will. Human actions are genuinely spontaneous, and authentically express each man’s nature, for God works in all things according to their nature; but the fact that it is God who works all man’s works in him means that human action can never be independent of God in the sense required for it to acquire merit in the manner which the Pelagians envisage. Man cannot put God in his debt, because man does not stand apart from God as a free and independent agent. Luther thus undercuts the whole conception of merit by affirming the direct sovereignty of God over His world. What he is saying is that the Pelagian idea of merit is a Deistic idea, and has no place in a Theistic order of things such as the Bible depicts, in which God works all in all according to the counsel of His own will. Luther does not shrink from stating this truth in its bluntest form. God, he says, works every human deed, whether good or evil. He works in the evil man according to that man’s nature, as He finds it. It is true that the evil man is proximately and directly governed by Satan, the strong man who keeps his goods in peace; yet it is God the Creator who energises Satan, according to his nature, and such power as Satan has is held and exercised by God’s own appointment. When Satan acts, according to his nature, as God’s enemy, he is being used, according to God’s purpose, as God’s own agent. Behind the revealed dualism of cosmic conflict between the devil and God lies the hidden mystery of absolute Divine sovereignty; evil is brought to expression only by the omnipotent working of the good God. ‘Since God moves and works all in all, He moves and works of necessity even in Satan and the ungodly. But He works according to what they themselves are, and what He finds them to be; which means, since they are evil and perverted themselves, that when they are impelled to action by this movement of Divine omnipotence they do only that which is perverted and evil. It is like a man riding a horse with only three, or two, good feet; his riding corresponds with what the horse is, which means that the horse goes badly . . . and so it is bound to be, unless the horse is healed. Here you see that when God works in and by evil men, evil deeds result; yet God ... is good, and cannot do evil; but he uses evil instruments. . . . The fault which accounts for evil being done when God moves to action lies in these instruments, which God does not allow to be idle . . .’ (p. 204). Mysterious though this is in detail, yet if God is absolutely sovereign and omnipotent, working all in all, then it must in some form be true; and therefore we must reject out of hand all forms of the Deistic notion of God as an onlooker, passively watching the acts of man, in whose performance He plays no direct part. But that means that ‘free-will’ in Erasmus’ sense of an inherent power in man to act apart from God, simply does not exist. Only God has ‘free-will’, for He is the only independent agent that there is. Man does not act independently of God’s necessitating purpose (though he likes to think he does), and therefore ‘free-will’ is an ‘empty name,’ an inapplicable title, when predicated of him.

Here, says Luther, is Erasmus’ deepest mistake. More than once he complains of the Deistic tinge of Erasmus’ thinking about the relations of man and God. ‘You, who imagine that the human will is something placed in an intermediate position of “freedom” and left to itself. . . imagine that both God and the devil are far away, mere spectators, as it were, of this mutable “free-will”; you do not believe that they are the prompters or drivers of an *enslaved* will, and each waging relentless war on the other! . . . Either the kingdom of Satan in man is unreal, in which case Christ will be a liar; or else, if this kingdom is as Christ describes it, “free-will” will be merely a beast of burden, Satan’s prisoner, which cannot be freed unless the devil is first cast out by the finger of God’ (p. 262). And Luther invokes against his opponent Augustine’s illustration of the point: ‘Man’s will is like a beast standing between two riders. If God rides, it wills and goes where God wills. ... If Satan rides, it wills and goes where Satan wills. Nor may it choose to which rider it will run, or which it will seek; but the riders themselves fight to decide who shall have and hold it’ (pp. iO3f.). If man could choose his own rider, his will would indeed be free, and he would be sovereign in his own salvation. But this is just what he cannot do. As a sinner, he is in the devil’s kingdom, and can do nothing but choose to remain there; it is not in his nature to do anything else. As a creature, he is in the hand of God, who leaves him under the power of sin, or rescues him from its clutches by renewing his nature, according to His own free and sovereign will. As a sinner, he cannot merit salvation in fact for he can do nothing good; as a creature, he could not do so in principle, for the creature can never make the Creator his debtor; man’s destiny depends entirely upon the free decision of God. Thus, Luther substitutes for Erasmus’ Deistic doctrine of human ‘free-will’ and salvation by meritorious action a genuinely Theistic doctrine of Divine Lordship and salvation by sovereign mercy. Erasmus affirms that God’s mercy is won by works; Luther, that it is recognised and received by faith. Erasmus holds that internal grace is elicited by merit; Luther, that it is freely given without merit and in defiance of demerit. Erasmus thinks of internal grace as the mere strengthening of a will that has already done well to help it do better; Luther thinks of it as a total renewal of corrupt nature by the Holy Spirit, which takes place when God ‘calls’ a man to faith in Jesus Christ and which makes him capable of good works for the first time in his life. Having changed man’s nature, God now works in him according to his new nature, and good works result. Salvation, both as secured for man by Christ, and as applied to and wrought in man by the Spirit, is God’s own supernatural work throughout. So Luther explains it:

‘What I say on this point is as follows: Man, before he is created to be man, does and endeavours nothing towards his being made a creature, and when he is made and created he does and endeavours nothing towards his continuance as a creature; both his creation and his continuance come to pass by the sole will of the omnipotent power and goodness of God, who creates and preserves us without ourselves. . . . So, too, I say that man, before he is renewed into the new creation of the Spirit’s kingdom, does and endeavours nothing to prepare himself for that new creation and kingdom, and when he is re-created he does and endeavours nothing towards his perseverance in that kingdom; but the Spirit alone works both blessings in us, regenerating us, and preserving us when regenerate, without ourselves. . . . But He does not work in us without us, for He re-created and preserves us for this very purpose, that He might work in us and we might co-operate with Him. Thus he preaches, shows mercy to the poor, and comforts the afflicted by means of us. But what is hereby attributed to “free-will”? What, indeed, is left it but—nothing! In truth, nothing!’ (p. 268).

Are there problems raised by this Biblical doctrine of the absolute sovereignty of God in providence and grace ? Of course there are. Everything that God reveals of Himself transcends man’s comprehension; every doctrine, therefore, must of necessity terminate in mystery, and man must humbly acquiesce in having it so. God does not tell men more of His purpose than man needs to know; and, just because man’s knowledge of what God is doing is always incomplete, His actions will often appear to man to have precisely opposite characteristics to those which He Himself ascribes to them. But in such cases it is man’s part deliberately to accept God’s interpretation in preference to his own. Faith will not lean to its own understanding of the appearance; faith will take God’s word as a safe index to the reality, and will wait patiently till contrary appearances dissolve away with the coming of greater light. The problem that presses in this case concerns the justice of God. Luther has full sympathy with the agonies of doubt and despair which this problem can cause to sensitive and realistic souls; he had been through the mill himself. ‘God conceals His eternal mercy and loving kindness beneath eternal wrath, His righteousness beneath unrighteousness,’ he writes. ‘Now, the highest degree of faith is to believe that He is merciful, though He saves so few and damns so many; to believe that He is just, though of His own will He makes us perforce proper subjects for damnation, and seems (in Erasmus’ words) “to delight in the torments of poor wretches and to be a fitter object for hate than for love.” If I could by any means understand how this same God, who makes such a show of wrath and unrighteousness, can yet be merciful and just, there would be no need for faith. But as it is, the impossibility of understanding makes room for the exercise of faith ...’ (p. ιοί). And it is here, when faced with appearances that seem to contradict God’s own Word, that faith is tried; for here reason rises up in arms against it. ‘Doubtless it gives the greatest possible offence to common sense or natural reason, that God, who is proclaimed as being full of mercy and goodness, and so on, should of His own mere will abandon, harden and damn men. ... It seems an iniquitous, cruel, intolerable thought to think of God; and it is this that has been a stumbling block to so many great men down the ages. And who would not stumble at it? I have stumbled at it myself more than once, down to the deepest pit of despair, so that I wished I had never been made a man. (That was before I knew how health-giving that despair was, and how close to grace.) This is why so much toil and trouble has been devoted to clearing the goodness of God, and throwing the blame on man’s will’ (p. 217). But the fact§ remain what they were: the cause of salvation and damnation alike is the sovereign will of God. Both nature and Scripture, if read aright, leave no doubt as to that.

What then shall we do? Luther has two pieces of advice for the man who is tempted to despair, and to deny God’s justice altogether. The first is that he should leave alone all speculation and enquiry as to. the hidden purposes of God, and confine his attention to what God has revealed and affirmed in His Word. Luther makes this point by developing the distinction between ‘God preached’ and ‘God not preached,’ ‘God hidden’ *(Deus absconditus).* ‘Wherever God hides Himself, and wills to be unknown to us, there we have no concern . . . God in His own nature and majesty is to be left alone; in this regard, we have nothing to do with Him, nor does He wish us to deal with Him. We have to do with Him as clothed and displayed in His Word. . . . God does many things which He does not show us in His Word, and He wills many things which He does not in His Word show us that He wills. ... We must keep in view his Word and leave alone His inscrutable will; for it is by His Word, and not by His inscrutable will, that we must be guided’ (pp. I7of.). And this means simply that we must listen to, and deal with, God as He speaks to us in Christ, and not attempt to approach or deal with Him apart from Christ. ‘We may not debate the secret will of Divine Majesty. . . . But let man occupy himself with God Incarnate, that is, with Jesus crucified, in whom, as Paul says, are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. . . .’ In Christ, God comes seeking the salvation of all men; He offers Himself to all; He weeps over Jerusalem because Jerusalem rejects Him. Hear Him, says Luther; rest on His word without fear; they who trust Him always find Him true. Shelve your problems about providence and predestination ; be humble enough to receive as God’s word the word which God speaks to you in Christ, and to trust yourself to Christ on the basis of it, however unable you may be to square that word with what you know, or think you know, of God’s dreadful hidden purposes. Commenting on Christ’s lament over Jerusalem (Matt. 23:27), Luther writes: ‘Here, God Incarnate says: “I would, and thou wouldest not.” God Incarnate, I repeat, was sent for this purpose, to will, say, do, suffer and offer to all men, all that is necessary for salvation; albeit He offends many who, being abandoned or hardened by God’s secret will of Majesty, do not receive him thus willing, speaking, doing and offering. ... It belongs to the same God Incarnate to weep, lament, and groan over the perdition of the ungodly, though that will of Majesty purposely leaves and reprobates some to perish. Nor is it for us to ask why He does so, but to stand in awe of God, Who can do, and wills to do, such things’ (p. 176).

The second piece of advice to those in temptation and turmoil *(Anfechtung)* over God’s justice is that they should remember that, as men, they cannot at present fully apprehend God; but that, though men, they may hope fully to understand in glory things that were hidden from them on earth. Luther develops these thoughts at the end of the book, in a noble passage of which we quote the conclusion:

‘I will give a parallel case, in order to strengthen our faith in God’s justice. . . . Behold! God governs the external affairs of the world in such a way that, if you regard and follow the judgment of human reason, you are forced to say, either that there is no God, or that God is unjust. . . . See the great prosperity of the wicked, and by contrast the great adversity of the good. . . . Yet all this, which looks so much like injustice in God, and is traduced as such by arguments which no reason or light of nature can resist, is most easily cleared up by the light of the gospel and the knowledge of grace ... in a single little word: *There is a life after this life; and all that is not punished and repaid here will be punished and repaid there. . . .*

‘If, now, this problem ... is swept away and settled so easily by the light of the gospel, which shines only in the Word and to faith, how do you think it will be when the light of the Woid and faith shall cease, and the real facts, and the majesty of God, shall be revealed as they are ? . . .

‘Keep in view three lights: the light of nature, the light of grace, and the light of glory. ... By the light of nature, it is inexplicable that it should be just for the good to be afflicted and the bad to prosper; but the light of grace explains it. By the light of grace, it is inexplicable how God can damn him who by his own strength can do nothing but sin and become guilty. Both the light of nature and the light of grace here insist that the fault lies not in the wretchedness of man, but in the injustice of God. . . . But the light of glory insists otherwise, and will one day reveal God, to Whom alone belongs a judgment whose justice is incomprehensible, as a God Whose justice is most righteous and evident—provided only that in the meanwhile we *believe* it, as we are instructed and encouraged to do . . .’ (pp. 315L).

## V. Conclusion

What is the modern reader to make of *The Bondage of the Will?* That it is a brilliant and exhilarating performance, a masterpiece of the controversialist’s difficult art, he will no doubt readily admit; but now comes the question, is Luther’s case any part of God’s truth? and, if so, has it a message for Christians to-day? No doubt the reader will find the way by which Luther leads him to be a strange new road, an approach ; which in all probability he has never considered, a line of thought which he would normally label ‘Calvinistic’ and hastily pass by. This is what Lutheran orthodoxy itself has done[^71]; and the present-day Evangelical Christian (who has semi-Pelagianism in his blood) will be inclined to do the same. But both history and Scripture, if allowed to speak, counsel otherwise.

Historically, it is a simple matter of fact that Martin Luther and John Calvin, and, for that matter, Ulrich Zwingli, Martin Bucer, and all the leading Protestant theologians of the first epoch of the Reformation, stood on precisely the same ground here. On other points, they had their differences; but in asserting the helplessness of man in sin, and the sovereignty of God in grace, they were entirely at one. To all of them, these doctrines were the very life-blood of the Christian faith. A modern editor of Luther’s great work underscores this fact: ‘Whoever puts this book down without having realised that evangelical theology stands or falls with the doctrine of the bondage of the will has read it in vain.’[^72] The doctrine of free justification by faith only, which became the storm-centre of so much controversy during the Reformation period, is often regarded as the heart of the Reformers’ theology, but this is hardly accurate. The truth is that their thinking was really centred upon the contention of Paul, echoed with varying degrees of adequacy by Augustine, and Gottschalk, and Bradwardine, and Wycliffe, that the sinner’s entire salvation is by free and sovereign grace only. The doctrine of justification by faith was important to them because it safeguarded the principle of sovereign grace; but it actually expressed for them only one aspect of this principle, and that not its deepest aspect. The sovereignty of grace found expression in their thinking at a profounder level still, in the doctrine of monergistic regeneration—the doctrine, that is, that the faith which receives Christ for justification is itself the free gift of a sovereign God, bestowed by spiritual regeneration in the act of effectual calling. To the Reformers, the crucial question was not simply, whether God justifies believers without works of law. It was the broader question, whether sinners are wholly helpless in their sin, and whether God is to be thought of as saving them by free, unconditional, invincible grace, not only justifying them for Christ’s sake when they come to faith, but also raising them from the death of sin by His quickening Spirit in order to bring them to faith. Here was the crucial issue: whether God is the author, not merely of justification, but also of faith; whether, in the last analysis, Christianity is a religion of utter reliance on God for salvation and all things necessary to it, or of self-reliance and self-effort. ‘Justification by faith only’ is a truth that needs interpretation. The principle of *sola fide* is not rightly understood till it is seen as anchored in the broader principle of *sola gratia.* What is the source and status of faith ? Is it the God-given means whereby the God-given justification is received, or is it a condition of justification which it is left to man to fulfil ? Is it a part of God’s gift of salvation, or is it man’s own contribution to salvation? Is our salvation wholly of God, or does it ultimately depend on something that we do for ourselves? Those who say the latter (as the Arminians later did) thereby deny man’s utter helplessness in sin, and affirm that a form of semi-Pelagianism is true after all. It is no wonder, then, that later Reformed theology condemned Arminianism as being in principle a return to Rome (because in effect it turned faith into a meritorious work) and a betrayal of the Reformation (because it denied the sovereignty of God in saving sinners, which was the deepest religious and theological principle of the Reformers’ thought). Arminianism was, indeed, in Reformed eyes a renunciation of New Testament Christianity in favour of New Testament Judaism; for to rely on oneself for faith is no different in principle from relying on oneself for works, and the one is as un-Christian and anti-Christian as the other. In the light of what Luther says to Erasmus, there is no doubt that he would have endorsed this judgment.

These things need to be pondered by Protestants to-day. With what right may we call ourselves children of the Reformation ? Much modern Protestantism would be neither owned nor even recognised by the pioneer Reformers. *The Bondage of the Will* fairly sets before us what they believed about the salvation of lost mankind. In the light of it, we are forced to ask whether Protestant Christendom has not tragically sold its birthright between Luther’s day and our own. Has not Protestantism today become more Erasmian than Lutheran? Do we not too often try to minimise and gloss over doctrinal differences for the sake of inter-party peace ? Are we innocent of the doctrinal indifferentism with which Luther charged Erasmus ? Do we still believe that doctrine matters ? Or do we now, with Erasmus, rate a deceptive appearance of unity as of more importance than truth? Have we not grown used to an Erasmian brand of teaching from our pulpits—a message that rests on the same shallow synergistic conceptions which Luther refuted, picturing God and man approaching each other almost on equal terms, each having his own contribution to make to man’s salvation and each depending on the dutiful co-operation of the other for the attainment of that end?—as if God exists for man’s convenience, rather than man for God’s glory? Is it not true, conversely, that it is rare to-day to hear proclaimed the diagnosis of our predicament which Luther—and Scripture —put forward: that man is hopeless and helpless in sin, fast bound in Satan’s slavery, at enmity with God, blind and dead to the things of the Spirit ? And hence, how rarely do we hear faith spoken of as Scripture depicts it—as it is expressed in the cry of self-committal with which the contrite heart, humbled to see its need and made conscious of its own utter helplessness even to trust, casts itself in the God-given confidence of selfdespair upon the mercy of Christ Jesus—‘Lord, I believe; help Thou my unbelief!’ Can we deny the essential rightness of Luther’s exegesis of the texts ? And if not, dare we ignore the implications of his exposition ?

To accept the principles which Martin Luther vindicates in *The Bondage of the Will* would certainly involve a mental and spiritual revolution for many Christians at the present time. It would involve a radically different approach to preaching and the practice of evangelism, and to most other departments of theology and pastoral work as well. God-centred thinking is out of fashion to-day, and its recovery will involve something of a Copernican revolution in our outlook on many matters. But ought we to shrink from this? Do we not stand in urgent need of such teaching as Luther here gives us—teaching which humbles man, strengthens faith, and glorifies God—and is not the contemporary Church weak for the lack of it ? The issue is clear. We are compelled to ask ourselves: If the Almighty God of the Bible is to be our God, if the New Testament gospel is to be our message, if Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to-day and for ever—is any other position than Luther’s possible ? Are we not in all honesty bound to stand with him in ascribing all might, and majesty, and dominion, and power, and all the glory of our salvation to God alone ? Surely no more important or far-reaching question confronts the Church to-day.

*Sola fide Sola gratia*

*SOLI DEO GLORIA.*

---

### Notes

[^1]: Succeeding editions appeared in 1519, 1522, 1527 and 1535.
[^2]: J. A. Froude, Life and Letters of Erasmus, p. 127. ‘Borgia’ is a slip for ‘Medici’ if the ruling Pontiff (Leo X) is meant. The last Borgia Pope was the profligate Alexander VI, who died in 1503.
[^3]: R. Bainton, Here I Stand, pp. 30-33.
[^4]: See E. G. Rupp, The Righteousness of God, pp. 87-95, 104 for refs.
[^5]: T. M. Lindsay, History of the Reformation, Vol. I, pp. 202-203.
[^6]: W.A. 45.86.18.
[^7]: See Rupp, Luther's Progress to the Diet of Worms, p. 38.
[^8]: Cone. Trid., sess. xxv, 2nd day, art. 1.
[^9]: Bainton, op. cit., p. 71. Rupp, quoting Scheel, gives the figures as 127,799 years and 116 days {Luther's Progress, p. 52).
[^10]: Erasmus casually sent a copy to Thomas More from Louvain on March 5th, 1518. See Ep. 3.785.
[^11]: W.A. Br. 1.27, p. 70. The substance of this objection was courteously passed on to Erasmus by Spalatin in December, Ep. 2.501.
[^12]: W.A. Br. 1.35, p. go.
[^13]: W.A. Br. 1.50, p. 118.
[^14]: See Ep. 3.904. 1. 19η.
[^15]: Ep. 3.872. See also his comments to Lang some months later in Ep. 3.983.
[^16]: Ep. 3.910.
[^17]: W.A. Br. 1.163, p. 361; [^E]P- 3-933-
[^18]: Ep. 3.939. Mesnard’s dating is incorrect.
[^19]: Ep. 3.947.
[^20]: Ep. 3.967.
[^21]: Ep. 3.980.
[^22]: Though not at Luther’s instigation, apparently, see Ep. 4.1041, Lutherseems to have written to Erasmus again in the autumn of 1519.
[^23]: Ep. 4.1033.
[^24]: Ep. 4.1113.
[^25]: See Ep. 4.1102.13η.
[^26]: Ep. 4.1119.
[^27]: Ep. 4.114.
[^28]: For a summary of this letter, see Froude, op. cit., pp. 271-272. For the letter itself, see Ep. 4.1143.
[^29]: See, e.g., Erasmus’ remarks in Ep. 4.1186.
[^30]: K. A. Meissinger, Erasmus von Rotterdam, p. 265.
[^31]: W.A. Tischr. 1.55.
[^32]: See Meissinger, op. cit., pp. 268-269 for this document in full.
[^33]: Ep. 4.1203.
[^34]: Ep. 4.1205.
[^35]: Ep. 4.1228.
[^36]: W.A. Br. 2.429, p. 387.
[^37]: Ep. 4.1217.
[^38]: Ep. 4.1219.
[^39]: Ep. 5.1324, esp. 11. 90-97.
[^40]: Ep. 5.1329 and 1352.
[^41]: See Ep. 5.1408..
[^42]: Ep. 5.1496, 11.197-199.
[^43]: Ep. 5.1358.
[^44]: Ερ. 5.1384.
[^45]: W.A. Br. 3.626, p. 96.
[^46]: Ep. 5.1385.
[^47]: Ep. 5.1397.
[^48]: Ep. 5.1443. W.A. Br. 3.729, p. 270.
[^49]: Ep. 5-1445·
[^50]: Ep. 5.1493.
[^51]: Freitag in W.A. 18, p. 567, says, with perhaps unconscious humour; Es lassen sich eine Menge weiterer Stellen aufweisen, die zeigen, dass auch nicht die mindeste Freiwill-igkeit seinerseits dabei im Spiele war' (a host of further passages can be quoted to show that from his [Erasmus’] side not even the smallest amount of free will entered into the matter).
[^52]: See his remarks to Melanchthon in Ep. 5.1496.
[^53]: to Marcus Laurinus, Ep. 5.1342.
[^54]: Ep. 5.1367.
[^55]: Ep. 5.1500.
[^56]: See Ep. 1430.
[^57]: Ep. 5.1526.
[^58]: Ep. 5.1522.
[^59]: Erasmus called it ingens volumen (a huge book) in Ep. 6.1686.
[^60]: Ep. 6.1688.
[^61]: Ep. 6.1672.
[^62]: Quoted in Allen, Erasmus (Oxford, 1934), p. 90.
[^63]: See, for example, Ep. 5.1522, 11. 40-42, 6.1688, 11. 14-15.
[^64]: W.A. Br. 8.3162, p. 99.
[^65]: ‘The Theology of the Reformation’ in Studies in Theology, p. 471.
[^66]: The Righteousness of God. p. 283.
[^67]: op. cit., pp. 4706 “Its words have hands and feet.”
[^68]: Quoted by P. S. Watson, Let God be God!, p. 29.
[^69]: Bainton, op. cit., p. 172.
[^70]: op. cit., p. 470.
[^71]: See H. J. Iwand in Vom unfreien Willen, p. 253.
[^72]: loc. cit.
