# II. Review of Erasmus' Preface (W.A. 603–639)

### (i) Of the necessity of assertions in Christianity (603-605)

First, I would run through some of the points in your Preface, where you make some attempt to prejudice our cause and embellish your own. To start with, I observe that, as elsewhere you censure me for being over-bold in making assertions, so here in this book you say that *you find so little satisfaction in assertions that you would readily take up the Sceptics' position wherever the inviolable authority of Holy Scripture and the Church’s decisions permit; though you gladly submit your judgment to these authorities in all that they lay down, whether you follow it or not.* That is the outlook which appeals to you.

I assume (as in courtesy bound) that it is your charitable mind and love of peace that prompts such sentiments. Were anyone else to express them, perhaps I should fall on him in my usual way! Nor ought I to allow even you, well-meaning as you are, to go astray any longer with such an idea. To take no pleasure in assertions is not the mark of a Christian heart; indeed, one must delight in assertions to be a Christian at all. (Now, lest we be misled by words, let me say here that by ‘assertion’ I mean staunchly holding your ground, stating your position, confessing it, defending it and persevering in it unvanquished. I do not think that the term has any other meaning, either in classical authors[^1] or in present-day usage. And I am talking about the assertion of what has been delivered to us from above in the Sacred Scriptures. Outside that field, we do not need Erasmus or any other teacher to tell us that over matters which are doubtful, or unprofitable and unnecessary, assertions and contentions are not merely stupid, but positively impious; Paul condemns them often enough! But I do not think you are speaking here about those things, unless like a comic orator you were intending to take up one subject and then deal with another, as the man did over the turbot; or unless you are godless and crazy enough to maintain that the article concerning ‘free-will’ is doubtful, or unnecessary.)

Away, now, with Sceptics and Academics from the company of us Christians; let us have men who will assert, men twice as inflexible as very Stoics! Take the Apostle Paul—how often does he call for that ‘full assurance’[^2] which is, simply, an assertion of conscience, of the highest degree of certainty and conviction. In Rom. io he calls it ‘confession’—‘with the mouth confession is made unto salvation’ (v. io). Christ says, ‘Whosoever confesseth me before men, him will I confess before my Father’ (Matt. 10.32). Peter commands us to give a reason for the hope that is in us (1 Pet. 3.15). And what need is there of a multitude of proofs? Nothing is more familiar or characteristic among Christians than assertion. Take away assertions, and you take away Christianity. Why, the Holy Spirit is given to Christians from heaven in order that He may glorify Christ and in them confess Him even unto death—and is this not assertion, to die for what you confess and assert? Again, the Spirit asserts to such purpose that He breaks in upon the whole world and convinces it of sin (cf. John 16.8), as if challenging it to battle. Paul tells Timothy to reprove, and to be instant out of season (2 Tim. 4.2); and what a clown[^3] I should think a man to be who did not really believe, nor unwaveringly assert, those things concerning which he reproved others! I think I should send him to Anticyra![^4]

But I am the biggest fool of all for wasting time and words on something that is clearer to see than the sun. What Christian can endure the idea that we should deprecate assertions ? That would be denying all religion and piety in one breath— asserting that religion and piety and all dogmas are just nothing at all. Why then do you—you!—*assert* that *you find no satisfaction in assertions,* and that you *prefer an undogmatic temper to any other?*

You would have it understood, no doubt, that you were not here referring at all to the confession of Christ and His doctrines. A correct reminder; and in deference to you I waive the right of which I normally avail myself and eschew all conjecture as to your real thoughts and motives. That I leave for another occasion, perhaps for other writers. Meanwhile, I advise you to correct your tongue and your pen, and refrain from using such expressions in future. Your heart may be upright and honest, but your words—which mirror the heart, they say—are neither. If you really think that the subject of ‘free-will’ is not necessary knowledge and does not relate to Christ, then your language is correct (for it expresses your meaning), but your thought is blasphemous; if you think this knowledge essential, then your language is blasphemous (for it seems to say the opposite) though your thought is correct. (And in that case all your great heap of complaints about useless assertions and contentions was outof place and beside the point.)

But what will you say about the words I quoted, in which you did not confine yourself to the specific matter of ‘free-will’, but spoke quite generally of all religious dogmas whatsoever ? There you said that *you would take up the Sceptics’ position if the inviolable authority of Holy Scripture and the Church’s decisions permitted you to do so, so little do you like assertions.* What a Proteus the man is to talk about ‘inviolable authority’ and ‘the Church’s decisions’! —as if you had a vast respect for the Scriptures and the Church, when in the same breath you tell us that you wish you had liberty to be a sceptic! What Christian could talk like that ? If you are speaking of doctrines that are unprofitable and uncertain, what news do you bring us? Does not everyone wish for liberty to be a sceptic in such matters? Does not every Christian in fact freely avail himself of such liberty, and censure those who become slavish devotees of any opinion ? Or perhaps you think (as your words certainly suggest) that all Christians are people whose dogmas are useless things, for which it is absurd of them to quarrel and fight with their assertions! But if you are referring to essential truths—why, what more irreligious assertion could a man possibly make than that he wants to be free to assert precisely *nothing* about such things? The Christian will rather say this: ‘So little do I like sceptical principles, that, so far as the weakness of my flesh permits, not merely shall I make it my invariable rule steadfastly to adhere to the sacred text in all that it teaches, and to assert that teaching, but I also want to be as positive as I can about those non-essentials which Scripture does not determine; for uncertainty is the most miserable thing in the world.’

What, now, shall we say of your next clause—*'I* *gladly submit my judgment to these authorities in all that they lay down, whether I follow it or not.’* What do you mean, Erasmus? Is it not enough to have submitted your judgment to Scripture? Do you submit it to the Church as well?—why, what can the Church settle that Scripture did not settle first ? And what room do you leave for that liberty and authority to judge the framers of these decisions of which Paul speaks in 1 Cor. 14, when he says: ‘let the others judge’ (v. 29) ? Do you object to there being a judge of the Church’s decisions, when Paul lays it down that there must be ? What is this new-fangled religion of yours, this novel sort of humility, that, by your own example, you would take from us power to judge men’s decisions and make us defer uncritically to human authority? Where does God’s written Word tell us to do that? And what Christian would so throw to the winds the commands of both Scripture and the Church as to say *'whether I follow or not’?* You defer to them, and yet you do not at all care whether you follow them or not? Woe to the Christian who doubts the truth of what is commanded him and does not follow it!—for how can he believe what he does not follow? Perhaps you are going to tell us that by ‘follow’ here you mean ‘hold with absolute certainty, without doubting in the Sceptical manner.’ But if ‘follow’ means ‘see and comprehend perfectly,’ what is there in any creature that any man could follow? And then it would never be the case that one who could follow some things could yet not follow other things; for he who followed one thing (I mean, God) would follow everything, whereas he who does not follow God never follows any part of His creation.

In a word, what you say comes to this: that you do not think it matters a scrap what anyone believes anywhere, so long as the world is at peace; you would be happy for anyone whose life, reputation, welfare or influence was at stake to emulate him who said ‘if they affirm, I affirm; if they deny, so do I;’[^5] and you would encourage him to treat Christian doctrines as no better than the views of human philosophers—about which, of course, it is stupid to wrangle and fight and assert, since nothing results but bad feeling and breaches of outward peace. ‘What is above us does not concern us’—that is your motto. So you intervene to stop our battles; you call a halt to both sides, and urge us not to fight any more over issues that are so stupid and sterile. That, I repeat, is the meaning of your words. And I think you know what I am driving at here, my dear Erasmus. But, as I said, let the words go; for the moment, I acquit your heart; but you must write no more in this strain. Fear the Spirit of God, who searches the reins and heart, and is not deceived by stupid speeches. I say this in order that from now on you may stop accusing our side of obstinacy and stubbornness. By so doing, you merely let us see that in your heart you cherish a Lucian, or some other hog of Epicurus’ herd, who, because he is an atheist himself, finds in all who believe in God and confess Him a subject for secret amusement. Leave us free to make assertions, and to find in assertions our satisfaction and delight; and you may applaud your Sceptics and Academics—till Christ calls you too! The Holy Spirit is no Sceptic, and the things He has written intmr hearts are not doubts or opinions, but assertions—surer and more certain than sense and life itself.

### (ii) Of the perspicuity of Scripture (606-609)

Now I come to another point, which is linked with this. You divide Christian doctrines into two classes, and make out that we need to know the one but not the other. *‘Some,’* you say, *‘are recondite, whereas others are quite plain.’* Surely at this point you are either playing tricks with someone else’s words, or practising a literary effect! However, you quote in your support Paul’s words in Rom. 11: Ό the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!’ (v. 33); and also Isa. 40: ‘Who gave help to the Spirit of the Lord, or who hath been his counsellor?’ (v. 13). It was all very easily said, either because you knew that you were writing, not just to Luther, but for the world at large, or else because you failed to consider that it was against *Luther* that you were writing! I hope you credit Luther with some little scholarship and judgment where the sacred text is concerned? If not, behold! I will wring the admission out of you! Here is my distinction (for I too am going to do a little lecturing—or chop a little logic, should I say?): God and His Scripture are two things, just as the Creator and His creation are two things. Now, nobody questions that there is a great deal hid in God of which we know nothing. Christ himself says of the last day: Of that day knoweth no man, but the Father’ (Matt. 24.36); and in Acts 1 he says: ‘It is not for you to know the times and seasons’ (v. 7); and again, he says: ‘I know whom I have chosen’ (John 13. 18); and Paul says: ‘The Lord knoweth them that are his’ (2 Tim. 2.19); and the like. But the notion that in Scripture some things are recondite and all is not plain was spread by the godless Sophists (whom now you echo, Erasmus)—who have never yet cited a single item to prove their crazy view; nor can they. And Satan has used these unsubstantial spectres to scare men off reading the sacred text, and to destroy all sense of its value, so as to ensure that his own brand of poisonous philosophy reigns supreme in the church. I certainly grant that many *passages* in the Scriptures are obscure and hard to elucidate, but that is due, not to the exalted nature of their subject, but to our own linguistic and grammatical ignorance; and it does not in any way prevent our knowing all the *contents* of Scripture. For what solemn truth can the Scriptures still be concealing, now that the seals are broken, the stone rolled away from the door of the tomb, and that greatest of all mysteries brought to light—that Christ, God’s Son, became man, that God is Three in One, that Christ suffered for us, and will reign for ever ? And are not these things known, and sung in our streets? Take Christ from the Scriptures—and what more will you find in them? You see, then, that the entire content of the Scriptures has now been brought to light, even though some passages which contain unknown words remain obscure. Thus it is unintelligent, and ungodly too, when you know that the contents of Scripture are as clear as can be, to pronounce them obscure on account of those few obscure words. If words are obscure in one place, they are clear in another. What God has so plainly declared to the world is in some parts of Scripture stated in plain words, while in other parts it still lies hidden under obscure words. But when something stands in broad daylight, and a mass of evidence for it is in broad daylight also, it does not matter whether there is any evidence for it in the dark. Who will maintain that the town fountain does not stand in the light because the people down some alley cannot see it, while everyone in the square can see it ?

There is nothing, then, in your remark about the ‘Corycian cavern’;[^6] matters are not so in the Scriptures. The profoundest mysteries of the supreme Majesty are no more hidden away, but are now brought out of doors and displayed to public view. Christ has opened our understanding, that we might understand the Scriptures, and the Gospel is preached to every creature. ‘Their sound is gone out into all lands’ (Ps. 19.4). ‘All things that are written, are written for our instruction’ (Rom. 15.4). Again: ‘All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for instruction’ (2 Tim. 3.16). Come forward then, you, and all the Sophists with you, and cite a single mystery which is still obscure in the Scripture. I know that to many people a great deal remains obscure; but that is due, not to any lack of clarity in Scripture, but to their own blindness and dullness, in that they make no effort to see truth which, in itself, could not be plainer. As Paul said of the Jews in 2 Cor. 4: ‘The veil remains on their heart’ (2 Cor. 3.15); and again, ‘If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, whose heart the god of this world hath blinded’ (2 Cor. 4.3-4). They are like men who cover their eyes, or go from daylight into darkness, and hide there, and then blame the sun, or the darkness of the day, for their inability to see. So let wretched men abjure that blasphemous perversity which would blame the darkness of their own hearts on to the plain Scriptures of God!

When you quote Paul’s statement, ‘his judgments are incomprehensible,’ you seem to take the pronoun ‘his’[^7] to refer to Scripture; whereas the judgments which Paul there affirms to be incomprehensible are not those of Scripture, but those of God. And Isaiah 40 does not say: ‘who has known the mind of Scripture?’ but: ‘who has known the mind of the Lord?’ (Paul, indeed, asserts that Christians do know the mind of the Lord; but only with reference to those things that are given to us by God, as he there says in 1 Cor. 2 (v. 12)). You see, then, how sleepily you examined those passages, and how apt is your citation of them—as apt as are almost all your citations for ‘free-will’! So, too, the examples of obscurity which you allege in that rather sarcastic passage are quite irrelevant—the distinction of persons in the Godhead, the union of the Divine and human natures of Christ, and the unpardonable sin. *Here,* you say, *are problems which have never been solved.* If you mean this of the enquiries which the Sophists pursue when they discuss these subjects, what has the inoffensive Scripture done to you, that you should blame such criminal misuse of it on to its own purity? Scripture makes the straightforward affirmation that the Trinity, the Incarnation and the unpardonable sin are facts. There is nothing obscure or ambiguous about that. You imagine that Scripture tells us *how* they are what they are; but it does not, nor need we know. It is here that the Sophists discuss their dreams; keep your criticism and condemnation for them, but acquit the Scriptures! If, on the other hand, you mean it of the facts themselves, I say again: blame, not the Scriptures, but the Arians and those to whom the Gospel is hid, who, by reason of the working of Satan, their god, cannot see the plainest proofs of the Trinity in the Godhead and of the humanity of Christ.

In a word: The perspicuity[^8] of Scripture is twofold, just as there is a double lack of light. The first is external, and relates to the ministry of the Word; the second concerns the knowledge of the heart. If you speak of *internal* perspicuity, the truth is that nobody who has not the Spirit of God sees a jot of what is in the Scriptures. All men have their hearts darkened, so that, even when they can discuss and quote all that is in Scripture, they do not understand or really know any of it. They do not believe in God, nor do they believe that they are God’s creatures, nor anything else—as Ps. 13 puts it, ‘The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God’ (Ps. 14.1). The Spirit is needed for the understanding of all Scripture and every part of Scripture. If, on the other hand, you speak of *external* perspicuity, the position is that nothing whatsoever is left obscure or ambiguous, but all that is in the Scripture is through the Word brought forth into the clearest light and proclaimed to the whole world.

### (iii) Of the importance of knowing what power ‘free-will’ has (609-614)

Still more intolerable is your classifying ‘free-will’ among the *‘useless doctrines that we can do without’.* In its stead you give us a list of what you consider to be sufficient for Christian piety—a draft, indeed, which a Jew, or a Gentile who knew nothing of Christ, could easily draw up; for you do not mention Christ in a single letter—as if you think that Christian piety is possible without Christ, so long as God, *(‘who is kindness itself’* you say) is whole-heartedly served.

What shall I say here, Erasmus ? You ooze Lucian from every pore; you swill Epicurus by the gallon. If you do not think this topic a necessary concern for Christians, kindly withdraw from the lists; we have no common ground; I think it vital. If it is *‘irreligious’, ‘idle’, ‘superfluous’—*your words—to know whether or not God foreknows anything contingently; whether our will is in any way active in matters relating to eternal salvation, or whether it is merely the passive subject of the work of grace; whether we do our good and evil deeds of mere necessity— whether, that is, we are not rather passive while they are wrought in us—then may I ask what *does* constitute godly, serious, useful knowledge? This is weak stuff, Erasmus; it is too much. It is hard to put it down to ignorance on your part, for you are no longer young,[^9] you have lived among Christians, and you have long studied the sacred writings; you leave me no room to make excuses for you or to think well of you. And yet the Papists pardon and put up with these outrageous statements, simply because you are writing against Luther! If Luther were not involved, and you wrote so, they would tear you limb from limb! Plato and Socrates may be good friends, but truth must be honoured above all. And, limited though your understanding of the Bible and the Christian life may be, even one who opposes Christians should know what they do and do not consider profitable and necessary. Here you are, a theologian, a teacher of Christians, now about to write for their guidance an outline of Christianity, and not merely do you vacillate, in your sceptical way, as to what is profitable and necessary for them; you go back on yourself, defy your own principles and make an *assertion—*an unheard-of assertion!—that here is something non-essential; when, in fact, if it is not really essential, and is not surely known, then neither God, Christ, the gospel, faith nor anything else even of Judaism, let alone Christianity, is left! God Immortal, Erasmus, how vulnerable you make yourself, how wide you lay yourself open to assault and obloquy! What could you write about ‘free-will’ that was good or correct, when you betray by these words of yours such utter ignorance of Scripture and of godliness ? But I shall furl my sails; I will not here use my own words to deal with you (that I may do later); I shall stick to yours.

The outline of Christianity which you have drawn up contains, among other things, this: *‘We should strive with all our might, resort to the healing balm of penitence,[^10] and try by all means to compass the mercy of God, without which man’s will and endeavour is ineffective.’* And this: *‘Nobody should despair of pardon from a God who by nature is kindness itself’* These Christ-less, Spirit-less words of yours are chillier than very ice; indeed, they spoil the beauty of your eloquence. Perhaps they are reluctant admissions dragged out of you (poor fellow!) by fear of a tyrannical hierarchy,[^11] lest you should seem an utter atheist! Anyway, this is what your words assert: that there is strength within us; there is such a thing as striving with all one’s strength; there is mercy in God; there are ways of compassing that mercy; there is a God who is by nature just, and kindness itself; and so on. But if one does not know what this ‘strength’ is—what men can do, and what is done to them—what this ‘striving’ is, what is the extent and limit of its effectiveness—then what should he do ? What will you tell him to do ? Let us see.

*'It is irreligious, idle and superfluous’* (you say) *‘to want to know whether our will effects anything in matters pertaining to eternal salvation, or whether it is wholly passive under the work of grace.’* But here you speak to the contrary, saying that Christian piety consists in *‘striving with all our might’,* and that *'apart from the mercy of God our will is ineffective.’* Here you plainly assert that the will is in some respect active in matters pertaining to eternal salvation, for you represent it as striving; and, again, you represent it as the object of Divine action when you say that without God’s mercy it is ineffective. But you do not define the limits within which we should think of the will as acting and as acted upon; you take pains to engender ignorance as to what God’s mercy and man’s will *can* effect by your very teaching as to what man’s will and God’s mercy *do* effect! Thus that caution of yours sends you round in circles; it has made you resolve to side with neither party, to emerge from between Scylla and Charybdis unscathed—so that if the waves in the open sea upset and overwhelm you, you can then assert all that you now deny, and deny all that you now assert!

I will set your theology before your eyes by a few analogies.[^12]Suppose a would-be poet or speech-maker never thought to ask what ability he had, what he could and could not do, and what the subject he was tackling demanded of him—never considered Horace’s adage about ‘What the shoulders can sustain, and what they will not bear’[^13]—but went straight to work, thinking: ‘I must strive to get it done; it is *idle* and *superfluous* to ask whether I have enough learning and eloquence and ability’—what would you think of him? And if someone who wanted a rich crop from his land was not *idle* enough to perform the *superfluous* task of investigating the nature of the soil (as Virgil in the Georgies so *idly* and *pointlessly* advises), but rushed precipitately into action, thinking of nothing but the work, and ploughed the seashore and cast his seed wherever there was room, whether in the sand or in the mud—what would you think of him ? And what if a man who purposed war, and wanted a glorious victory, or carried responsibility for some other piece of public service, was not so *idle* as to reflect upon what was in his power, whether the treasury could finance him, whether the soldiers were fit, whether there was opportunity for action; but disregarded the historian’s advice[^14] (‘Before acting, deliberate, and when you have deliberated, act speedily’), and charged ahead with eyes shut and ears stopped, shouting nothing but ‘War! War!’—pressing on with the work? Tell me, Erasmus, what would you think of such poets, farmers, generals and statesmen? I will add a text from the Gospel: ‘If anyone, intending to build a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost, whether he has sufficient to finish it’—well, what is Christ’s judgment on that man? (cf. Luke 14.28).

In just this way, you prescribe for us nothing but things to do, and yet you forbid us to examine, measure and take knowledge of the limits of our ability, as if this were an idle, superfluous and irreligious enquiry. In this, for all that horror of imprudence and that ostentatious sobriety to which your vast caution prompts you, we find you teaching imprudence at its worst. The Sophists are fools and madmen, in fact, to pursue their idle enquiries; yet they sin less than you, who actually instruct men to cultivate madness and give themselves over to folly. And your madness is greater still, in that you assure us that this folly is the loveliest Christian piety, gravity, serious godliness—and salvation! And if we do not do as you tell us, you *assert* (you, the sworn foe of assertions!) that we are irreligious, idle and empty!—-and thus you admirably dodge Scylla and escape Charybdis too! Confidence in your own ability drives you along here; you think that by your eloquence you can so dupe the public that nobody will realise what you cherish in your heart and what you are trying to achieve by these slippery writings of yours. But God is not mocked, and it is not good policy to run against Him!

Furthermore: were it with reference to writing poetry, or preparing for harvest, or military or public service, or building houses, that you taught us such folly, it would still be outrageous, particularly in so great a man as yourself, yet it could have been forgiven you—at any rate, by Christians, who pay no regard to these temporal things. But when you tell Christian people to let this folly guide them in their labours, and charge them that in their pursuit of eternal salvation they should not concern themselves to know what is in their power and what is not—why, this is plainly the sin that is really unpardonable. For as long as they do not know the limits of their ability, they will not know what they should do; and as long as they do not know what they should do, they cannot repent when they err; and impenitence is the unpardonable sin. This is where your moderate, sceptical theology leads us!

So it is not irreligious, idle, or superfluous, but in the highest degree wholesome and necessary, for a Christian to know whether or not his will has anything to do in matters pertaining to salvation. Indeed, let me tell you, this is the hinge on which our discussion turns, the crucial issue between us; our aim is, simply, to investigate what ability ‘free-will’ has, in what respect it is the subject of Divine action and how it stands related to the grace of God. If we know nothing of these things, we shall know nothing whatsoever of Christianity, and shall be in worse case than any people on earth! He who dissents from that statement should acknowledge that he is no Christian; and he who ridicules or derides it should realise that he is the Christian’s chief foe. For if I am ignorant of the nature, extent and limits of what I can and must do with reference to God, I shall be equally ignorant and uncertain of the nature, extent and limits of what God can and will do in me—though God, in fact, works all in all (cf. i Cor. 12.6). Now, if I am ignorant of God’s works and power, I am ignorant of God himself; and if I do not know God, I cannot worship, praise, give thanks or serve Him, for I do not know how much I should attribute to myself and how much to Him. We need, therefore, to have in mind a clear-cut distinction between God’s power and ours, and God’s work and ours, if we would live a godly life.

So, you see, this point is a further item in any complete summary of Christianity. Self-knowledge, and the knowledge and glory of God, are bound up with it. Which means, my dear Erasmus, that it is simply intolerable of you to call the knowledge of it irreligious, idle, and vain. Your claims upon us are many, but the fear of God claims of us everything. Indeed, you yourself see that all good in us is to be ascribed to God, and assert as much in your outline of Christianity; and this assertion certainly involves a second, namely, that God’s mercy alone works everything, and our will works nothing, but is rather the object of Divine working, else all will not be ascribed to God. And yet a little further on you deny that it is religious, godly, or wholesome, to assert or know these things! But an inconsistent thinker, unsure and inexperienced in the things of God, cannot help talking in this fashion.

### (iv) Of the necessitating foreknowledge of God (614-618)

Another item in the summary of Christianity is knowing whether God foresees anything contingently, or whether we do all things of necessity. This knowledge also you represent as something irreligious, idle, and vain, just as all the ungodly do -—indeed, the devils and the damned also represent it as hateful and abhorrent! You are wise to keep clear of such questions as far as you can; but you are a very poor rhetorician and theologian if you venture to open your mouth and instruct us about ‘free-will’ without any reference to these matters. I will act as your whetstone; though I am no rhetorician myself, I will dare to tell an excellent rhetorician his business. Suppose that Quintilian, having chosen to write on Oratory, were to say, ‘In my judgment, all that superfluous nonsense about invention, arrangement, elocution, memory and pronunciation, should be left out; it is enough to know that Oratory is the ability to speak well’—would you not laugh at such an author? Yet, in just the same way, you first choose to write on ‘free-will’ and then exclude from consideration the entire substance and all the constituent parts of the topic you are going to write about! For you cannot know what ‘free-will’ is without knowing what ability man’s will has, and what God does, and whether He foreknows of necessity.

Surely your rhetoricians teach that he who would speak about a subject should first say whether it exists, then what it is, what its parts are, what is contrary to it, allied to it, like it, and so on ? But you deprive poor ‘free-will’ of all these advantages, and settle no single question relating to it save the first, i.e. whether it exists (and we shall see how worthless your arguments on *that* point are)—so that a more incompetent book on ‘free-will’ (apart from the elegance of its language) I never saw!

In fact, the Sophists argue on this subject better than you, innocent though they are of rhetorical skill; for, when they tackle ‘free-will’, they do try to settle all the questions concerning it (whether it exists, what it is, what it does, how it exists, etc.)—even though they too fail to achieve their object. In this book of mine, therefore, I shall harry you and all the Sophists till you tell me exactly what ‘free-will’ can and does do; and I hope so to harry you (Christ helping me) as to make you repent of ever publishing your Diatribe.

It is, then, fundamentally necessary and wholesome for Christians to know that God foreknows nothing contingently, but that He foresees, purposes, and does all things according to His own immutable, eternal and infallible will. This bombshell knocks ‘free-will’ flat, and utterly shatters it; so that those who want to assert it must ether deny my bombshell, or pretend not to notice it, or find some other way of dodging it. Before I establish this point by my own arguments and Scriptural authority, I shall first state it with the aid of*your* words.

Surely it was you, my good Erasmus, who a moment ago asserted that *God is by nature just, and kindness itself?* If this is true, does it not follow that He is *immutably* just and kind ? that, as His nature remains unchanged to all eternity, so do His justice and kindness ? And what is said of His justice and kindness must be said also of His knowledge, His wisdom, His goodness, His will, and the other Divine attributes. But if it is religious, godly and wholesome, to affirm these things of God, as you do, what has come over you, that now you should contradict yourself by affirming that it is irreligious, idle and vain to say that God foreknows by necessity? You insist that we should learn the immutability of God’s will, while forbidding us to know the immutability of His foreknowledge! Do you suppose that He does not will what He foreknows, or that He does not foreknow what He wills? If He wills what He foreknows, His will is eternal and changeless, because His nature is so. From which it follows, by resistless logic, that all we do, however it may appear to us to be done mutably and contingently, is in reality done necessarily and immutably in respect of God’s will. For the will of God is effective and cannot be impeded, since power belongs to God’s nature; and His wisdom is such that He cannot be deceived. Since, then His will is not impeded, what is done cannot but be done where, when, how, as far as, and by whom, He foresees and wills. If the will of God were such that, when the work had been done and while it yet remained in being, the will ceased (as is the case with the will of a man, who, when he has built, say, the house he wants, ceases to will just as really as he does in death), then it could truly be said that things happen contingently and mutably. But the contrary is in fact true: the work ceases to be and the will remains in being— so far beyond the bounds of possibility is it that the production and continued existence of anything can be contingent. Lest we be deceived over our terms, let me explain that *being done contingently* does not, in Latin, signify that the thing done is itself contingent, but that it is done by a contingent and mutable will—such as is *not* to be found in God! And a deed cannot be called *contingent* unless we do it ‘contingently’, i.e. by chance (as it were) and without premeditation; that is, when our will or hand fastens on something presented to us as if by chance, without our having previously thought or planned anything about it.

I could wish, indeed, that a better term was available for our discussion than the accepted one, *necessity,* which cannot accurately be used of either man’s will or God’s. Its meaning is too harsh, and foreign to the subject; for it suggests some sort of compulsion, and something that is against one’s will, which is no part of the view under debate. The will, whether it be God’s or man’s, does what it does, good or bad, under no compulsion, but just as it wants or pleases, as if totally free. Yet the will of God, which rules over our mutable will, is changeless and sure —as Boetius sings, ‘Immovable Thyself, Thou movement giv’st to all;’ and our will, principally because *of* its corruption, can do no good of itself. The reader’s understanding, therefore, must supply what the word itself fails to convey, from his knowledge of the intended signification—the immutable will of God on the one hand, and the impotence of our corrupt will on the other. Some have called it *necessity of immutability,* but the phrase is both grammatically and theologically defective.[^15]

This is a point over which the Sophists have toiled for many years now (and have been defeated at last, and forced to give in): they maintained that *all things take place necessarily, but by necessity of consequence* (as they put it), *and not by necessity of the thing consequent.* By this distinction they eluded the force of their own admission—or, rather, deluded themselves! I shall not find it hard to show how unreal the distinction is. By *necessity of consequence,* they mean, roughly speaking, this: If God wills something, then it must needs be; but that which thus comes to be is something which of itself need not be; for only God exists necessarily, and everything else can cease to be, if God so wills. This is to say that God’s action is necessary, if He wills it, but the thing done is not in itself necessary. But what do they establish by this play on words? This, I suppose—the thing done is not necessary; that is, it has no necessity in its own essential nature: which is just to say, that the thing done is not God Himself! Nonetheless, it remains true that each thing *does* happen necessarily, if God’s action is necessary or there is a necessity of consequence, however true it may be that it does *not* happen necessarily, in the sense that it is not God and has no necessity of its own essential nature. If I come to exist of necessity, it does not much worry me that my existence and being are in themselves mutable; contingent and mutable as I am (and I am not God, the necessary Being), yet I still come to exist!

So their absurd formula, *all things take place by necessity of consequence, but not by necessity of the thing consequent,* amounts merely to this: everything takes place by necessity, but the things that take place are not God Himself. But what need was there to tell us that?—as though there were any fear of our claiming that things which happen are God, or possess a divine and necessarily existent nature! So our original proposition still stands and remains unshaken: all things take place by necessity. There is no obscurity or ambiguity about it. In Isaiah, it says ‘My counsel shall stand, and my will shall be done’ (46.10); and any schoolboy knows the meaning of ‘counsel’, ‘will’, ‘shall be done’, ‘shall stand’!

And why should these matters be thought so recondite for us Christians that it is irreligious, idle, and vain to study and know them, when they are on the lips of heathen poets and ordinary people so frequently? How often does Vergil, for one, mention Fate? ‘All things stand fixed by law immutable.’ Again, ‘Fixed is the day of every man.’ Again, ‘If the Fates summon you.’ Again, ‘If thou shalt break the binding cord of Fate.’[^16] The poet simply seeks to show that in the destruction of Troy and the beginning of the Roman empire Fate did more than all the efforts of men. Indeed, he makes even his immortal gods subject to Fate. Jupiter and Juno themselves needs must yield to it. Hence the poets represented the three Fates[^17] as immutable, implacable and irrevocable in their decrees. Those wise men knew, what experience of life proves, that no man’s purposes ever go forward as planned, but events overtake all men contrary to their expectation. ‘Could Troy have stood by human arm, it should have stood by mine,’ says Vergil’s Hector.[^18]Hence that commonest of all remarks, which is on everyone’s lips—‘God’s will be done’; and: ‘If God will, we will do it’; and: ‘God so willed,’ ‘such was the will of those above.’ ‘Such was your will,’ says Vergil. Whence we see that the knowledge of predestination and of God’s prescience has been left in the world no less certainly than the notion of the Godhead itself. But those who wished to seem wise argued themselves out of it till their hearts grew dark and they became fools, as Rom. i says (vv. 21-2), and denied, or pretended not to know, things which the poets, and the common people, and even their own consciences held as being most familiar, most certain, and most true.

### (v) Of the importance of knowing that God necessitates all things (618-620)

I would also point out, not only how true these things are (I shall discuss that more fully from Scripture on a later page), but also how godly, reverent and necessary it is to know them. For where they are not known, there can be no faith, nor any worship of God. To lack this knowledge is really to be ignorant of God—and salvation is notoriously incompatible with such ignorance. For if you hesitate to believe, or are too proud to acknowledge, that God foreknows and wills all things, not contingently, but necessarily and immutably, how can you believe, trust and rely on His promises? When He makes promises, you ought to be out of doubt that He knows, and can and will perform, what He promises; otherwise, you will be accounting Him neither true nor faithful, which is unbelief, and the height of irreverence, and a denial of the most high God! And how can you be thus sure and certain, unless you know that certainly, infallibly, immutably and necessarily, He knows, wills and will perform what He promises? Not only should we be sure that God wills, and will execute His will, necessarily and immutably; we should glory in the fact, as Paul does in Rom. 3—‘Let God be true, but every man a liar’ (v. 4), and again, ‘Not that the word of God has failed’ (Rom. 9.6), and in another place, ‘The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth them that are his’ (2 Tim. 2.19). In Tit. 1 he says: ‘Which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began’ (v. 2). And Heb. 11 says: ‘He that cometh, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that hope in him’ (v. 6).

If, then, we are taught and believe that we ought to be ignorant of the necessary foreknowledge of God and the necessity of events, Christian faith is utterly destroyed, and the promises of God and the whole gospel fall to the ground completely; for the Christian’s chief and only comfort in every adversity lies in knowing that God does not lie, but brings all things to pass immutably, and that His will cannot be resisted, altered or impeded.

Observe now, my good Erasmus, where that cautious, peace-loving theology of yours leads us! You call us back, and prohibit our endeavours to learn about God’s foreknowledge and the necessity which lies on men and things, and advise us to leave behind, and avoid, and look down on such enquiries; and in so doing you teach us your own ill-advised principles—that we should seek after ignorance of God (which comes to us without our seeking, and indeed is born in us), and so should spurn faith, abandon God’s promises, and discount all the consolations of the Spirit and convictions of our consciences. Epicurus himself would hardly give such advice! Moreover, not content with this, you call those who are concerned to acquire the knowledge in question godless, idle and empty, and those who care nothing for it you call godly, pious and sober. What do you imply by these words, but that Christians are idle, empty and godless fellows ? and that Christianity is a trivial, empty, stupid and downright godless thing? So here again, in your desire to discourage us from anything rash, you allow yourself to be carried to the contrary extreme (as fools do) and teach the very quintessence of godless, suicidal folly. Do you see, now, that at this point your book is so godless, blasphemous and sacrilegious, that its like cannot be found anywhere ?

I do not speak of your heart, as I said before; for I do not think you are so abandoned that you honestly want to teach these principles or see them applied. But I wanted to make you realise what appalling sentiments the champion of a bad cause finds himself constrained unguardedly to blurt out; and also what it means to go against God’s facts and God’s Word when we dissemble to oblige others, and defy conscience by acting a part at their bidding. It is no game and no joke[^19] to teach the holy Scriptures and godliness, for it is so very easy to fall here in the way that James described: ‘he that offends in one point becomes guilty of all’ (2.10). For when we show ourselves disposed to trifle even a little and cease to hold the sacred Scriptures in sufficient reverence, we are soon involved in impieties and overwhelmed with blasphemies—as you are here, Erasmus. May the Lord pardon and have mercy on you!

I know, and join you in affirming, that the Sophists have raised a host of questions on these topics, and mixed in with them a great deal of unprofitable matter besides, much of which you specify; indeed, I have attacked them more vigorously and fully than you. But you are ill-advised and over-hasty to confuse and lump together the purity of sacred truth with the profane and foolish questions of the ungodly. ‘They have defiled the gold with dung, and changed its good colour,’ as Jeremiah says (Lam. 4.1). But the gold should not be equated with the dung and thrown away with it, as you are doing. The gold must be reclaimed from their hands, the pure Scripture must be separated from their own rotten rubbish; which is what I have always tried to do, so that divine truth may be kept distinct from their nonsense. Nor should it disturb us that nothing has been established through their investigations save that a great loss of unity and decline in affection results when we aspire to be over-wise. Our question is not, what have the Sophistical enquirers achieved ? but, how may we become good men and Christians ? And you should not blame on to Christian doctrine the evil doings of the godless; all that is quite irrelevant, and you could well speak of it elsewhere and save paper.

### (vi) Of the alleged advantages of suppressing certain truths (620-630)

Under your third head, you try to turn us into unassuming, idle Epicureans. This is a different kind of advice, but no sounder than the two pieces of your mind already quoted. *‘Some things'* (you say) *‘are of such a kind that, even if they were true and could be known, it would be imprudent to expose them to everyone’s hearing.’* Here again, as usual, you muddle everything up, equating what is holy with what is not, not distinguishing them at all; and so you fall once more to insulting and dishonouring Scripture and God. As I said above, what may be found in or proved by the sacred writings is both plain and wholesome, and so may safely be published, learned and known—and, indeed, should be. So your statement, that some things should not be exposed to everyone’s hearing, if made with reference to the contents of Scripture, is false; and if you spoke of other things, your remark was irrelevant and out of place, and a waste of your paper and time. Moreover, you know that I disagree with the Sophists in everything; you might well spare me, therefore, and not lay their perversities at my door. It was against me, remember, that you were supposed to be writing in your book! I know where the Sophists go wrong; I do not need you to tell me; I have criticised them enough myself. I should like that said once for all, and repeated as often as you class me with the Sophists and dilate on their madness to prejudice my case. You are acting unscrupulously, as you very well know.

Now let us look at your reasons for giving this advice. *It is true,* you say, *that, God’s nature being what it is, He is no more really in Heaven than He is in a beetle’s hole, or even down a drain* (which you yourself scruple to say; you blame the Sophists for blathering about such things)—*-yet,* you suggest, *it would be unreasonable to talk about it in public.*

Now, in the first place, let them blather who will—we are not dealing here with what men do, but with what is right and ought to be done; not with how we do live, but how we should live. Who among us always lives and behaves as he should? But duty and doctrine are not therefore condemned; rather, they condemn us! The truth is, you fetch from afar and rake together all these irrelevances simply because you are embarrassed on this one point, the foreknowledge of God; and, since you cannot overthrow it by any argument, you try meantime to tire out the reader with a flow of empty verbiage. But enough of that; back to the point.

What is the bearing of your statement that some things should not be made public ? Do you include the subject of ‘free-will’ among them? If so, all I said above about the necessity of understanding ‘free-will’ will round upon you. And why, in that case, have you not followed your own principles, and left your Diatribe unwritten? If you do well to discuss ‘free-will’, why do you censure such discussion ? If it is a bad thing to do, why do you do it? If, on the other hand, you do not put ‘freewill’ into this category, then once more you are all this time evading the issue, lavishing your long-winded rhetoric on red herrings!

Nor are you right in your treatment of this example, nor in condemning as useless public discussion of the fact that God is in a hole or down a drain. Your thoughts of God are too human. I certainly admit that there are some giddy preachers, who, from no religious or godly motive, but because they want applause, or hanker after novelty, or just cannot keep their mouths shut, talk the most frivolous nonsense; but such please neither God nor men, even by affirming that God is in the heaven of heavens! Where, however, preachers are serious and godly, teaching in sober, pure, sound words, they refer to this sort of thing in public without risk of harm, and, indeed, to much profit. Surely we should all teach that the Son of God was in the Virgin’s womb, and born of her belly? And how much does a human belly differ from any other unclean place ? One could use foul and disgusting language to describe it; though we deservedly censure those who do, since an abundance of pure words exists for referring to that necessary subject without either unpleasantness or indecency. Again, Christ’s body was human, like our own—and what is more foul than that? Yet surely we should not therefore stop saying that God indwelt that body—*bodily,*as Paul puts it? (cf. Col. 2.9.) What is more foul than death? What is more frightful than hell? Yet the Prophet glories that God is with him in death and near him in hell (cf. Ps. 16.10, 139.8).

So the godly mind is not shocked to hear that God is in death or in hell; though either is more frightful and foul than a hole or a sewer. Indeed, since Scripture testifies that God is everywhere and fills all things, a godly man does not just say that He is in these places; of necessity he learns and knows that He is there—unless we must suppose that, were I ever caught by a tyrant and thrown into a cell or a sewer (as has happened to many saints) I might not there call on God, nor believe that He was with me till I could get into some ornate church ? If you teach us this kind of nonsense about God, and are shocked at the places where His Essence resides, you will end by refusing to allow that He dwells with us in heaven—for the heaven of heaven cannot contain Him (cf. 1 Kings 8.27), nor is it worthy to do so. The truth is as I said: you are venting your spleen on us, as usual, in order to prejudice and discredit our cause, because you see that you cannot conquer or overthrow it.

As for your second example, the proposition that *‘there are three Gods,’* I admit that this, if taught, is a real stumbling-block. But it is neither true nor Scriptural; it is just a product of the new logic which the Sophists have invented. And what is that to us ?

Your treatment of your final example, the case of confession and satisfaction, is a marvellously skilful piece of diplomacy. From first to last (as usual) you tread like a cat on hot bricks,[^20]fearful lest you should seem to fail either to condemn our position out of hand or to oppose the Papal tyranny—rather a tight corner for you! So you put God and conscience out of mind for the time being (what does Erasmus care what God wills and conscience sanctions in these matters ?); you create a diversion; you drag in an irrelevant bogey[^21] and assault it. You denounce the people, because their depravity leads them to make the preaching of freedom from confession and satisfaction an excuse for freedom in flesh-pleasing. *‘Now’* (you say) *'the necessity of making confession to some extent restrains them.’*

Oh, what a fine, noble sentiment! Is this teaching theology? —to bind under laws and, in Ezekiel’s phrase (cf. Ezek. 13.18C) to hunt to death souls which God never bound? Why, by this reasoning you will bring on us once more the entire tyranny of the Papal laws, and defend it as useful and wholesome—for those laws too restrain the depravity of the people! I shall not launch the onslaught which this passage deserves; but, briefly, the truth is this: A good theologian teaches that people should be restrained by the external power of the sword when they do evil, as Paul teaches in Rom. 13 (vv. 1-4). But their consciences must not be ensnared by false laws, and thereby tormented for sins where according to God’s will there is no sin. Consciences are bound by God’s law alone, and the Papal tyranny, which by its falsehoods frightens and murders souls within, and uselessly exhausts the body from without, is an intruder that should be banished forthwith. Though by external pressure it forces men to make confession and perform other burdensome tasks, it fails to restrain their minds, which are only the more provoked hereby to hate both God and man. Its external butchery of the body is equally futile; it just produces hypocrites. So that the tyrants who impose such laws are nothing but ravening wolves and robbers, stealing souls! And now you, the expert counsellor of souls, recommend to us once more these barbarous soul-murderers, who fill the world with blaspheming, proud-hearted hypocrites solely in order to subject them to a measure of outward restraint!—as if without making hypocrites of them and destroying their consciences there was no way at all of restraining them! as I said.

Now you bring in analogies (for you want to show off your range and mastery of analogies):—*'there are diseases’* (you say) *'which can be borne with less evil than they can be cured, like leprosy’—* and so on. And you quote the example of Paul, who distinguished between what was lawful and what was expedient (cf. i Cor. 6.12). *‘It is lawful’* (you say) *‘to speak the truth, but it is not expedient to do so in every company, nor at every time, nor in every way.’*

What a fulsome speaker you are!—but utterly ignorant of what you are talking about. In a word, you treat this discussion as if the issue at stake between us was the recovery of a debt, or some other trivial item, the loss of which matters far less than the public peace, and therefore should not so upset anyone as to make him hesitate to give and take, yielding the point if need be, in order to ensure that no occasion for public disorder arises. You make it clear that this carnal peace and quiet seems to you far more important than faith, conscience, salvation, the Word of God, the glory of Christ, and God himself. Let me tell you, therefore—and I beg you to let this sink deep into your mind—I hold that a solemn and vital truth, of eternal consequence, is at stake in this discussion; one so crucial and fundamental that it ought to be maintained and defended even at the cost of life, though as a result the whole world should be, not just thrown into turmoil and uproar, but shattered in chaos and reduced to nothingness. If you do not grasp that, if it leaves you unmoved, then mind your own business, and leave those to grasp it and be moved by it to whom it is given of God!

For, thank God, I am not such a silly fool that I would have been willing to sustain and champion this cause for so long, with such fortitude and firmness (obstinacy, you call it), often at the risk of my life, hated and plotted against continually—enduring, in a word, the rage of men and of devils together—merely to gain money (which I neither have nor want), or renown (which I could not have if I wanted it in a world that hates me so), or to protect my life (which is always forfeit now). Do you think that because your heart trembles at these upheavals you are the only one who has a heart ? I am not made of stone, either; I am no child of Marpesian crags. But (since it must be one or the other) I would rather be joyful in God’s grace and bear the brunt of this temporal uproar for the sake of the Word of God— which demands to be asserted with invincible and unshakeable zeal—rather that, I say, than be ground to powder under the wrath of God by the unbearable torments of the uproar that shall be everlasting! May Christ grant that your heart may not be as your words suggest—I hope and pray that it is not—for you certainly imply that you agree with Epicurus that God’s Word and the life to come are fables. For your teaching is designed to induce us, out of consideration for Popes, princes and peace, to abandon and yield up for the present the sure Word of God. But when we abandon that, we abandon God, faith, salvation, and all Christianity! How much sounder is Christ’s advice, that we should rather despise the whole world!

You say this sort of thing simply because you have not read, or at any rate have not noticed, that it is regularly the case with the Word of God that the world is thrown into confusion by reason of it. Christ openly affirms as much: T came not’ (says He) ‘to send peace, but a sword’ (Matt. 10.34). So in Luke: ‘I came to send fire on the earth’ (12.49). So Paul, in 1 Cor 6: ‘In tumults,’ etc. (2 Cor. 6.5). The prophet in the second Psalm bears elaborate testimony to the same truth when he declares that the nations are in uproar, the peoples rage, the kings rise up, the rulers conspire, against the Lord and against Christ— as though to say that the many, the mighty, wealth, power, wisdom, righteousness and all that is exalted in the world opposes the Word of God. Look at the Acts of the Apostles, and see there what happened in the world by reason of the word of Paul alone (to say nothing of the other apostles)—how, single-handed, he threw into confusion Jews and Gentiles alike. As his foes said of him, he turned the world upside down! (Acts 17.6). The kingdom of Israel was thrown into confusion under Elijah, as Ahab complained (1 Kings 18.17). What upheaval was there under the other prophets, when they were all executed or stoned, and Israel was led captive into Assyria, and Judah to Babylon! Was *that* peace? The world and its god cannot and will not bear the Word of the true God, and the true God cannot and will not keep silent. Now these two Gods are at war; so what else can there be throughout the world but uproar ?

To want to quell these tumults, therefore, is really to want to remove the Word of God and stop its course. When the Word of God comes, it comes to change and renew the world, and even heathen writers acknowledge that such changes cannot take place without commotion and upheaval—nor, indeed, without bloodshed. Now it is the Christian’s part to expect and coolly to endure these things—as Christ says, ‘When ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be not dismayed: for these things must first come to pass, but the end is not yet’ (Matt. 24.6). Personally, did I not see these upheavals, I should say that the Word of God was not in the world. Now that I see them, I rejoice from my heart and smile at them, knowing for sure that the Pope’s kingdom and all its allies will fall; for the Word of God is now in full cry, and these are its principal target.

I see indeed, my good Erasmus, that in many of your books you deplore the loss of peace and concord, and make a series of attempts to heal the breach. Your intentions are of the best (at least, I think so); but the gouty foot laughs at your doctoring. Here, as you yourself admit, you are indeed sailing against the stream; why, you are trying to quench fire with straw! Stop your complaining, stop your doctoring; the origin and continuance of this conflict is from God; and it will not cease till all who oppose the Word have become as the mire of the streets. I can only regret, however, that so great a theologian as yourself needs to go back to school and be taught these things, when you should have been teaching others.

Your elegant dictum that some diseases may be borne with less harm than they can be cured with is in point here; but you misapply it. Give the name of ‘diseases which may be borne with less harm’ to these tumults, commotions, confusions, dissensions, discords, wars and everything else of that sort with which the world is shaken and buffeted on account of the Word of God! These things, I say, being temporal, may be endured with less harm than inveterate evil ways, which will inevitably ruin all souls that are not changed by the Word of God. If the _ Word were removed, eternal good, God, Christ, and the Spirit, would be removed with it. How much better, then, is it to lose the world than to lose God, the world’s Creator, who can create countless worlds afresh, and is better than infinite worlds! For what are temporal things beside eternal? We should, therefore, endure this leprous outbreak of temporal evils, rather than keep the world at peace and free from these upheavals; for the price of that peace would be the blood and ruin of all souls, who would then be destroyed and damned for ever! For the whole world is not of value enough to redeem a single soul.

You command fine, elegant analogies and epigrams; but the way you apply them when you treat of holy things is childish—indeed, perverse. You grovel on the ground and cannot conceive of anything that is above man’s understanding. But there is nothing childish, or merely man-like, about the operations of God; they are Divine, and they exceed man’s grasp. And that is why you fail to see that it is by reason of God’s will and activity that these tumults and divisions are raging throughout the world—and so you are afraid that the sky will fall! But I, by God’s grace, clearly see what you cannot see; indeed, I foresee other, greater upheavals in store for a future generation, compared with which these present are but as the whisper of a faint breeze, or the murmur of a gentle brook.

Now, to return to the doctrine of freedom from confession and satisfaction: you are denying, or at least showing yourself unaware, that there exists a Word of God. This, of course, is a different inquiry. I, for my part, know for sure that there is a Word of God, which asserts Christian liberty and warns us not to let ourselves be snared into bondage by human traditions and laws. This I have taught at length elsewhere; but, if you want to enter the lists, I am ready to discuss it and fight it out with you too. (There are quite a number of books written by myself on this subject.)

*‘But’* (you say) *‘the Papal laws should still in charity be borne with and kept, for it may be that eternal salvation through the Word of God will yet prove compatible with the world’s peace without any disturbance.’*

As I said above, that cannot be. The prince of this world does not permit the laws of the Pope and his pontiffs to be kept in liberty; his intention is to entangle and bind consciences. This the true God cannot bear. So the Word of God and the traditions of men fight each other in implacable opposition. God and Satan are personally engaged in this same conflict, each labouring to destroy the works and subvert the doctrines of the other, like two kings laying waste each other’s kingdoms. ‘He that is not with me,’ said Christ, ‘is against me’ (Luke 11.23).

As for your fear that many persons of vicious inclination will abuse this liberty, this must be thought of as one of the disturbances aforementioned, part of the temporal leprosy that we must bear and the malady that we must endure. But it must not be held so important as to warrant the removal of the Word of God in order to restrain their abuse of it. If not all can be saved, yet some are saved; the Word of God came for their sake, and so they love it the more fervently and assent to it the more readily. What evil did ungodly men not do before the Word came? and what good did they ever do? Was not the world always full of war, deceit, violence, quarrelling and iniquity of every kind?—so much so that Micah compares the best among them to a thorn hedge! (cf. Mic. 7.4)—and what do you think he would say of the others? Yet now that the gospel is come, men start blaming the world’s wickedness on to it!— when the truth is, rather, that the good Gospel brings the world’s wickedness to light; for without the gospel the world dwelt in its own darkness. So do the uneducated blame education for the fact that, as education spreads, their own ignorance becomes apparent. Such are the thanks we return for the word of life and salvation! What fear may we suppose there was among the Jews, when the Gospel freed all men from the law of Moses? What scope did not this great liberty appear to give to evil men? Yet the Gospel was not, on that account, taken away; instead, the godly were told not to use their liberty to indulge the flesh (cf. Gal. 5.13), and the ungodly were left to their own devices.

Moreover, there is no force in that part of your advice— panacea, I should say—in which you observe: *‘It is lawful to speak the truth; but it is not expedient to do so in every company, nor at every time, nor in every way,’* and quote Paul (inappropriately enough) where he says: ‘All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient’ (1 Cor. 6.12). Paul does not speak there of teaching doctrinal truth; you are wresting his words, forcing them to mean what you want. In fact, Paul would have the truth spoken everywhere, at all times, in any and every way; so that he is delighted even when Christ is preached out of envy and ill-will, and openly declares that he rejoices, however Christ is preached (cf. Phil. i.i5f.). In the text you quote, Paul speaks only of behaviour and the practical application of doctrine; he is dealing with those who, boasting of their Christian liberty, seek their own ends without considering how they offend and injure the weak. No; doctrinal truth should be preached always, openly, without compromise, and never dissembled or concealed. There is no offence in it; it is the staff of uprightness. Who gave you the right and power to confine Christian doctrine to particular persons, places, times and cases, when Christ wills that it should be freely published and reign throughout the world? ‘The word of God is not bound,’ says Paul (2 Tim. 2.9); and shall Erasmus bind the Word? God did not give us a Word that has respect of times, places, or persons. When Christ says: ‘Go ye into all the world’ (Matt. 28.19), He does not say, as does Erasmus, ‘go to this place, but not that.’ Again: ‘Preach the Gospel to every creature’ (Mark 16.15). He does not say: ‘to some, but not to others.’ In short, you enjoin in the ministry of God’s Word respect of persons, of places, of customs and of seasons; whereas one great part of the glory of the Word is precisely this—that, as Paul says, it does not respect persons, nor is God a respecter of persons (cf. Rom. 2.11; Eph. 6.9; Col. 3.25). You see again how unadvisedly you rush against the Word of God, as though you rated your own thoughts and ideas far above it.

If we should ask you to settle for us the occasions when, and the persons to whom, and the ways in which, the truth is to be spoken, how soon would you give your answer? The world could calculate when time is to stop and its own existence end sooner than you could establish a single reliable rule. What is to happen to the teaching office, the work of soul-instruction, while we are waiting for you ? In any case, how could you fix such rules, when you know no general principles governing persons, times or manners? And even if you knew them perfectly, you would not know the hearts of men. Or perhaps the manner, time and person you have in mind are as follows—so to teach the truth that the Pope does not object, Caesar is not enraged, pontiffs and princes are not upset, and no disturbances and upheavals are caused in the world, lest many should stumble and grow worse? What sort of a policy this is, you saw above. But you were pleased to indulge in this unprofitable rhetoric, so that you might avoid saying nothing!

How much more fitting is it for wretched men like ourselves to ascribe to God, Who knows all men’s hearts, the glory of settling the way in which, and the persons to whom, and the occasions when, the truth should be spoken! He Himself knows what should be said to each, and when, and how. Now, He has laid it down that His Gospel, which all need, should not be confined to any place or time, but should be preached to all men, at all times and in all places. I proved earlier that what is delivered in the Scriptures is plain to all, and is wholesome, and must be proclaimed abroad—as you stated yourself in your *Paraclesis,* with better judgment than you are showing now. Those who are unwilling for souls to be redeemed, like the Pope and his adherents—leave it for them to bind the Word of God and keep men from life and the kingdom of heaven; for they neither enter in themselves, nor allow others to enter (cf. Matt. 23.13). You only do harm, Erasmus, when you pander to their obsession by this policy of yours.

The same circumspection appears in your next bit of advice, that *wrong decisions made in councils should not be publicly acknowledged, lest grounds for denying the authority of the fathers should thereby be given.* This, of course, is just what the Pope wanted you to say! He finds it sweeter hearing than the Gospel itself; he will be most ungrateful if he does not honour you in return with a cardinal’s hat, plus all the attendant revenues! But in the meanwhile, Erasmus, what will those souls do that are bound and butchered by this iniquitous ordinance? Is it nothing to you? Of course, you always think, or pretend to think, that men’s ordinances can be observed together with the Word of God without risk. If they could, I would at once come over to your view. But, if you are still in ignorance, I must tell you again: men’s ordinances cannot be observed together with the Word of God, because the former bind consciences and the latter looses them. The two things are as much opposed to each other as fire and water. This would not, indeed, be so if men’s ordinances could be observed in liberty: that is, as not binding the conscience. But the Pope will not have that, nor can he, unless he wants his kingdom destroyed and ended; for it stands only by ensnaring and binding consciences which the Gospel pronounces free. The authority of the Fathers must therefore be held null and void, and any erroneous decisions they made (as are all that conflict with the Word of God) must be torn up and thrown away; for Christ is a higher authority than the Fathers. In short, then: if you take this position with reference to the Word of God, it is blasphemy; and if with reference to other things only, then your long-winded argument for your policy is nothing to me, for it is precisely with reference to the Word of God that I am arguing!

### (vii) Of the alleged disadvantages of proclaiming that God necessitates all things (630-634)

In the last part of your Preface, where you earnestly dissuade us from our kind of doctrine, you think victory is almost won. *‘ What’* (you say) *‘can be more useless than to publish to the world the paradox that all we do is done, not by “free-will”, but of mere necessity, And Augustine’s view that God works in us both good and evil; that He rewards His own good works in us, and punishes His own evil works in us?’* (You are copious here in giving reasons, or, rather, in demanding that we give them.) *‘What a flood-gate of iniquity’* (you say) *‘would the spread of such news open to people! What wicked man would amend his life? Who would believe that God loved him? Who would fight against his flesh?’* (I wonder that in this furious outburst you did not remember the matter in hand, and say: ‘where then will “free-will” be found?’!)

My good Erasmus! I reply as before. If you think these paradoxes are inventions of men, why do you oppose them? why get so heated? against whom are you speaking? Is there any man in the world to-day who has attacked the doctrines of men more strongly than Luther? Your lecture is wasted on me! If, however, you believe these paradoxes to be words of God, then where is your conscience,[^22] where is your shame, where is, I will not say your famous moderation, but the fear and reverence which you owe to the true God ?—for what you are saying is that there is no information more useless than God’s Word! So your Creator must learn from you, His creature, what may usefully be preached and what not? God was so stupid and thoughtless, was He, that He did not know what should be taught till you came along to tell Him how to be wise, and what to command?—as if without your pointing it out He would not have realised that this paradox involves the consequence you draw ? No; if God has willed that these things should be openly proclaimed and published, who are you to forbid it? The apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Romans, frankly discusses these very matters, not in a corner, but openly, publicly, before the whole world, and in harsher terms than those you quote. ‘Whom he will he hardeneth,’ he says; and again, ‘God, willing to show forth his wrath,’ etc. (Rom. 9.18, 22). What is harder (to the flesh, at any rate) than Christ’s saying, ‘Many are called, but few chosen?’ (Matt. 22.14). And again, ‘I know whom I have chosen?’ (John 13.18). On your view, of course, there is no information more useless than all this—your reason being, presumably, that it might drive the ungodly to despair, hatred and blasphemy!

Here, I see, you are taking the view that the truth and usefulness of Scripture should be measured and decided according to the feeling of men—to be precise, of the ungodliest of men; so that nothing henceforth will be true, Divine and wholesome but what these persons find pleasing and acceptable; and what is not so will at once become useless, untrue and harmful. What else do you here plead for, but that the words of God may thus depend on, and stand or fall by, the will and authority of men? But Scripture says the opposite, that all things stand or fall by the will and authority of God, and that all the earth keeps silence before the face of the Lord (cf. Hab. 2.20). One who talks as you do must imagine that the living God is no more than a wild inconsequent ranter shouting from a soap-box,[^23]whose words you may interpret, receive or refute as you please, according to their observed effect on the ungodly. Here you make plain, my dear Erasmus, just how little sincerity lay behind your advice, given earlier, that we should revere the majesty of the judgments of God. Then, dealing with the doctrines of Scripture (where there is no need to revere hidden mysteries, since no doctrines in fact are such), you warned us in the most pious language against any inquisitive invasion of the Corycian caverns, and well-nigh frightened us off reading the Bible altogether—though Bible-reading is something to which Christ and the Apostles urgently exhort us, as elsewhere you do yourself. But now that we have actually come, not just to the doctrines of Scripture or the Corycian cavern, but to the awful secret of God’s Majesty—that is, as was said, the question, why does He work as He does—here you break down the barriers and burst in, all but blaspheming! What indignation against God do you not display, because you may not see the reason and design of His counsel! Why do you not invoke obscurities and ambiguities here? Why do you not restrain yourself, and discourage others, from prying into matters which God wills to keep hidden from us, and has not made known in the Scriptures ? Here we should lay our hand on our mouth; here we should revere what lies concealed, and adore the secret decrees of the Divine Majesty, and cry with Paul: “Who art thou, O man, that contendest with God?’ (Rom. 9.20).

*‘Who’* (you say) *‘will try and reform his life?’* I reply, Nobody! (Nobody can! God has no time for your practitioners of self-reformation, for they are hypocrites. The elect, who fear God, will be reformed by the Holy Spirit; the rest will perish uniformed. Note that Augustine does not say that a reward awaits *nobody’s* works, or *everybody’s* works, but *some men’s* works. So there will be some who reform their lives.

*‘Who will believe’* (you say) *‘that God loves him?’* I reply, jNobody! nobody can! But the elect shall believe it; and the rest shall perish without believing it, raging and blaspheming, as you describe them. So there will be some who believe it.

You say that *a flood-gate of iniquity is opened by our doctrines.* So be it. Ungodly men are part of that evil leprosy aforementioned, which we must endure. Nevertheless these are the very doctrines which throw open to the elect, who fear God, a gateway to righteousness, an entrance into heaven, and a road to God! If, as you advise, we should keep off these doctrines, and hide this word of God from men, and leave them all to labour under a false assurance of salvation, never learning the fear of God and true humiliation, and so never coming through that fear to true, saving grace and love—why, then we should have shut your flood-gate to some purpose; for in its place we should set open before ourselves and everyone else broad gates, yes, gaping chasms and raging whirlpools, to take us down not only into sin, but into the very depths of hell! Thus we too should fail to enter heaven ourselves, and hinder others who were entering (cf. Matt. 23.13).

*‘ What use or need is there, then, of publishing such things, when so many harmful results seem likely to follow ?’*

I reply: It should be enough to say simply that God has willed their publication, and the reason of the Divine will is not to be sought, but simply to be adored, and the glory given to God, Who, since He alone is just and wise, wrongs none and can do nothing foolish or inconsiderate—however much it may seem otherwise to us. This answer will satisfy those who fear God. However (to say a little more than I need, since there is so much more that I can say), there are two considerations which require the preaching of these truths. The first is the humbling of our pride, and the comprehending of the grace of God; the second is the nature of Christian faith.

For the first: God has surely promised His grace to the humbled: that is, to those who mourn over and despair of themselves. But a man cannot be thoroughly humbled till he realises that his salvation is utterly beyond his own powers, counsels, efforts, will and works, and depends absolutely on the will, counsel, pleasure and work of Another—God alone. As long as he is persuaded that he can make even the smallest contribution to his salvation, he remains self-confident and does not utterly despair of himself, and so is not humbled before God; but plans out for himself (or at least hopes and longs for) a position, an occasion, a work, which shall bring him final salvation. But he who is out of doubt that his destiny depends entirely on the will of God despairs entirely of himself, chooses nothing for himself, but waits for God to work in him; and such a man is very near to grace for his salvation.

So these truths are published for the sake of the elect, that they may be humbled and brought down to nothing, and so saved. The rest of men resist this humiliation; indeed, they condemn the teaching of self-despair; they want a little something left that they can do for themselves. Secretly they continue proud, and enemies of the grace of God. This, I repeat, is one reason—that those who fear God might in humility comprehend, claim and receive His gracious promise.

The second reason is this: faith’s object is things not seen. That there may be room for faith, therefore, all that is believed must be hidden. Yet it is not hidden more deeply than under a contrary appearance of sight, sense and experience. Thus, when God quickens, He does so by killing; when He justifies, He does so by pronouncing guilty; when He carries up to heaven, He does so by bringing down to hell. As Scripture says in i Kings 2, ‘The Lord killeth and maketh alive; He bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up’ (1 Sam. 2.6). (This is no place for a fuller account of these things; but those who have read my books are well acquainted with them.) Thus God conceals His eternal mercy and loving kindness beneath eternal wrath, His righteousness beneath unrighteousness. Now, the highest degree of faith is to believe that He is merciful, though He saves so few and damns so many; to believe that He is just, though of His own will He makes us perforce proper subjects for damnation, and seems (in Erasmus’ words) *‘to delight in the torments of poor wretches and to be a fitter object for hate than for love.’* If I could by any means understand how this same God, who makes such a show of wrath and unrighteousness, can yet be merciful and just, there would be no need for faith. But as it is, the impossibility of understanding makes room for the exercise of faith when these things are preached and published; just as, when God kills, faith in life is exercised in death.

And that is enough at present for your Preface!

By our method of open discussion we shall do more good to those who argue about these paradoxes than we should by following your advice, which springs from a desire to humour their impiety by keeping quiet and saying nothing. But you achieve nothing by this advice. For suppose you believe, or suspect, even, that the paradoxes are true—well, they are matters of no small moment, and so insatiable is man’s desire to pry into secrets (and the more so the more we want to keep them secret!) that your very dissuasive will make everyone far more eager than before to know whether the paradoxes are true or not! Your own heat will so inflame them that this godly zealous admonition of yours will give them more reason to make the paradoxes common knowledge than anyone on our side has ever done! You would have been far wiser to say nothing at all about avoiding the paradoxes if you wanted your wish granted. Now, however, seeing that you have not directly denied their truth, it will be impossible to keep them hidden; their apparent plausibility will encourage everyone to look into them—and that will be that! You must either deny their truth, or else hold your own tongue first, if you want other people to hold theirs.

### (viii) Of the spontaneity of necessitated acts (634-635)

As for the other paradox, *‘all we do is done, not by free-will, but of mere necessity'—*let us take a brief look at it, for we must not let such a mischievous remark go unchallenged. My comment is simply this: if it be proved that our salvation is not of our own strength or counsel, but depends on the working of God alone (which is something I hope to demonstrate later in the main discussion), does it not clearly follow that when God is not present to work in us, all is evil, and of necessity we act in a way that contributes nothing towards our salvation? For if it is not we, but God alone, who works salvation in us, it follows that, willy-nilly, nothing we do has any saving significance prior to His working in us.

I said ‘of necessity’; I did not say ‘of compulsion’; I meant, by a necessity, not of *compulsion,* but of what they call *immutability.* That is to say: a man without the Spirit of God does not do evil against his will, under pressure, as though he were taken by the seruff of the neck and dragged into it, like a thief or footpad being dragged off against his will to punishment; but he does it spontaneously and voluntarily. And this willingness or volition is something which he cannot in his own strength eliminate, restrain or alter. He goes on willing and desiring to do evil; and if external pressure forces him to act otherwise, nevertheless his will within remains averse to so doing and chafes under such constraint and opposition. But it would not thus chafe were it being changed, and were it yielding to constraint willingly. This is what we mean by *necessity of immutability:* that the will[^24] cannot change itself, nor give itself another bent, but, rather, is the more provoked to crave the more it is opposed, as its chafing proves; for this would not occur, were it free or had ‘free-will’. Ask experience how impervious to dissuasion are those whose hearts are set on anything! If they abandon their quest of it, they only do so under pressure, or because of some counter-attraction, never freely—whereas, when their hearts are not thus engaged, they spare their labour, and let events take their course.

On the other hand: when God works in us, the will is changed under the sweet influence of the Spirit of God. Once more it desires and acts, not of compulsion, but of its own desire and spontaneous inclination. Its bent still cannot be altered by any opposition; it cannot be mastered or prevailed upon even by the gates of hell; but it goes on willing, desiring and loving good, just as once it willed, desired and loved evil. Experience proves this too. How firm and invincible are holy men, who, when forcibly constrained to sin, are the more provoked thereby to desire good—even as flames are fanned, rather than quenched, by the wind. Here, too, there is no freedom, no ’free-will’, to turq, elsewhere, or to desire anything else, as long as the Spirit and grace of God remain in a man.

' In a word: if we are under the god of this world, strangers to the work of God’s Spirit, we are led captive by him at his Will, as Paul said to Timothy (2 Tim. 2.26), so that we cannot will anything but what he wills. For he is a ‘strong man armed,’ who keeps his palace to such good effect that those he holds are at peace, and raise no stir or feeling against him—otherwise, Satan’s kingdom would be divided against itself, and could not Stand; but Christ says it does stand. And we acquiesce in his rule willingly and readily, according to the nature of willingness, which, if constrained, is not ‘willingness’; for constraint means rather, as one would say, ‘unwillingness’.[^25]But if a stronger appears, and overcomes Satan, we are once more Servants and captives, but now desiring and willingly doing what *He* wills—which is royal freedom (cf. Luke 11.18-22).

So man’s will is like a beast standing between two riders. If God rides, it wills and goes where God wills: as the Psalm says, 'I am become as a beast before thee, and I am ever with thee’ (Ps. 73.22-3). If Satan rides, it wills and goes where Satan wills. Nor may it choose to which rider it will run, or which it will seek; but the riders themselves fight to decide who shall have and hold it.

### (ix) That a will which has no power without grace is not free (635-638)

What if I prove from the very words in which you assert ‘free-will’ that there is no such thing as ‘free-will’? and show that you unwittingly deny what you are trying with such vast sagacity to affirm ? Why, if I fail here, I promise you that all I write against you in this book shall be withdrawn, and all that your Diatribe advances and seeks to establish against me shall be ratified!

You describe the power of ‘free-will’ as small, and wholly ineffective apart from the grace of God.[^26] Agreed? Now then, I ask you: if God’s grace is wanting, if it is taken away from that small power, what can it do ? It is ineffective, you say, and can do nothing good. So it will not do what God or His grace wills. Why? Because we have now taken God’s grace away from it, and what the grace of God does not do is not good. Hence it follows that ‘free-will’ without God’s grace is not free at all, but is the permanent prisoner and bondslave of evil, since it cannot turn itself to good. This being so, I give you full permission to enlarge the power of ‘free-will’ as much as you like; make it angelic, make it divine, if you can!—but when once you add this doleful postscript, that it is ineffective apart from God’s grace, straightway you rob it of all its power. What is *ineffective* power but (in plain language) *no* power? So to say that ‘free-will’ exists and has power, albeit ineffective power, is, in the Sophists’ phrase, a contradiction in terms.[^27] It is like saying ‘ “free-will” is something which is not free’—as if you said that fire is cold and earth hot. Fire certainly has power to heat; but if hell-fire (even) was cold and chilling instead of burning and scorching, I would not call it ‘fire’, let alone ‘hot’ (unless you meant to refer to an imaginary fire, or a painted one). Note, however, that if we meant by ‘the power of freewill’ the power which makes human beings fit subjects to be caught up by the Spirit and touched by God’s grace, as creatures made for eternal life or eternal death, we should have a proper definition. And I certainly acknowledge the existence of *this* power, this fitness, or ‘dispositional quality’ and ‘passive aptitude’ (as the Sophists call it), which, as everyone knows, is not given to plants or animals. As the proverb says, God did not make heaven for geese!

It is a settled truth, then, even on the basis of your own testimony, that we do everything of necessity, and nothing by ‘free-will’; for the power of ‘free-will’ is nil, and it does no good, nor can do, without grace. (Unless you intend ‘efficacy’ to be taken in a new sense, as implying completion, and are suggesting that ‘free-will’ can actually will and begin a thing, though it cannot complete it. This I do not believe; I shall say more on the point later.) It follows, therefore, that ‘free-will’ is obviously a term applicable only to the Divine Majesty; for only He can do, and does (as the Psalmist sings) ‘whatever he wills in heaven and earth’ (Ps. 135.6). If‘free-will’ is ascribed to men, it is ascribed with no more propriety than divinity itself would be—and no blasphemy could exceed that! So it befits theologians to refrain from using the term when they want to speak of human ability, and to leave it to be applied to God only. They would do well also to take the term out of men’s mouths and speech, and to claim it for their God, as if it were His own holy and awful Name. If they must at all hazards assign some power to men, let them teach that it must be denoted by some other term than ‘free-will’; especially since we know from our own observation that the mass of men are sadly deceived and misled by this phrase. The meaning which it conveys to their minds is far removed from anything that theologians believe and discuss. The term ‘free-will’ is too grandiose and comprehensive and fulsome. People think it means what the natural force of the phrase would require, namely, a power of freely turning in any direction, yielding to none and subject to none. If they knew that this was not so, and that the term signifies only a tiny spark of power, and that utterly ineffective in itself, since it is the devil’s prisoner and slave, it would be a wonder if they did not stone us as mockers and deceivers, who say one thing and mean another—indeed, who have not yet decided what we do mean! For, as the wise man says, ‘he who speaks sophistically is hateful’ (? Pr. 6.17), especially if he does so in matters of religion, where eternal salvation is at stake.

Since, therefore, we have lost the meaning and the real reference of this glorious term, or, rather, have never grasped them (as was claimed by the Pelagians, who themselves mistook the phrase) why do we cling so tenaciously to an empty word, and endanger and delude faithful people in consequence ? There is no more wisdom in so doing than there is in the modern foible of kings and potentates, who retain, or lay claim to, empty titles of kingdoms and countries, and flaunt them, while all the time they are really paupers, and anything but the possessors of those kingdoms and countries. We can tolerate their antics, for they fool nobody, but just feed themselves up—-unprofitably enough—on their own vainglory. But this false idea of ‘free-will’ is a real threat to salvation, and a delusion fraught with the most perilous consequences.

Most people would be amused, or, more likely, infuriated if at this late hour a linguistic revolutionary threw overboard established usage, and tried in its place to introduce the practice of calling a beggar *wealthy,* not because he had any wealth, but because it was possible that a king might give him his—and talked in this way, not as a figure of speech, like sarcasm or irony, but with all apparent seriousness. Thus, he would call one who was sick unto death *perfectly healthy,* on the ground that another might give him his health. Or he would call an unlettered idiot *a learned man,* on the ground that another might give him his learning. It is no different to say, *man has free-will’* —merely on the ground that God might grant him His! By thus misusing language, anyone can boast that he has anything : for instance, that he is the lord of heaven and earth—if God would give him that distinction! But such talk is more appropriate to actors and confidence tricksters[^28] than to theologians! Our words should be correct, pure and sober—in Paul’s phrase, ‘sound speech, that cannot be condemned’ (Tit. 2.8).

If we do not want to drop this term altogether—which would really be the safest and most Christian thing[^29] to do—we may still in good faith teach people to use it to credit man with ‘free-will’ in respect, not of what is above him, but of what is below him. That is to say, man should realise that in regard to his money and possessions he has a right to use them, to do or to leave undone, according to his own ‘free-will’—though that very ‘free-will’ is overruled by the free-will of God alone, according to His own pleasure. However, with regard to God, and in all that bears on salvation or damnation, he has no ‘freewill’, but is a captive, prisoner and bondslave, either to the will of God, or to the will of Satan.

### (x) Conclusion of this section (638-639)

These observations of mine on the heads of your Preface cover nearly the whole matter under debate, almost more so than does the body of the book to follow. The essence of what I have said can be put in a nutshell in the following dilemma: Your Preface states objections either to the words of God or to the words of men. If the latter, it is all written to no purpose, and does not touch me. If the former, it is all blasphemy. In view of that, it would have been helpful had it been plainly stated whether it was about the words of God or of men that we were arguing. But maybe that will come up in the Prologue which follows, or in the main discussion.

Your recapitulation at the close of the Preface does not impress me one whit. You call my doctrines *fables and useless things',* you say *that Christ crucified should rather be preached according to Paul’s example; that wisdom should be taught among the perfect; that the language of Scripture is accommodated to the various capacities of the hearers; and that you therefore think it is best left to the discretion and charity of the instructor to teach what will profit his neighbour.* Silly, ignorant remarks, all of them! We teach nothing save Christ crucified. But Christ crucified brings all these doctrines with Him, including ‘wisdom also among them that are perfect.’ No other wisdom may be taught among Christians than that which is ‘hidden in a mystery,’ and this belongs only to the ‘perfect’—not to the sons of a Judaizing, law-bound generation which has no faith and boasts of its works! So thinks Paul; see i Cor. 2 (vv. 6ff.). Do you, I wonder, take preaching Christ crucified to be just a matter of calling out “Christ was crucified,” and nothing more?

As for your remark that *‘God. is represented as angry, furious, hating, grieving, pitying, repenting, none of which passions have any place in him,'* this is mere carping obstructionism.[^30]These expressions do not make Scripture obscure, nor do they need adapting to the various capacities of the hearers—unless, of course, one likes creating difficulties where none exist! They are accepted forms of language—figures of speech which even schoolboys know about. What we debate in this case, however, is not linguistic figures, but doctrines.

---

### Notes

[^1]: latinis.
[^2]: plerophoriam (πληροφορίαν): cf. Col. 2.2; 1 Thess. 1.5; Heb. 6.11,10.22.
[^3]: festivus.
[^4]: A health resort on the Aegean coast, famous for hellebore, which was used in [^;] treating mental illness.
[^5]: Ter., Eun., II. 2.21.
[^6]: 'Pomponius Mela tells of a certain Corycian cavern which at first allures by its charming loveliness and draws one into itself until, as one enters deeper and deeper, a trembling awe at the majesty of the god who dwells there sends one back. So, when we reach this point, it would in my judgment be more prudent and reverent to cry with Paul: “0 the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" (Rom. 11.33).’ The cave was on Mt. Parnassus, some three miles north of Delphi, and was sacred to Pan and the nymphs.
[^7]: eius.
[^8]: claritas.
[^9]: senex.
[^10]: poenitmtiae.
[^11]: pontificum.
[^12]: similitudinibus.
[^13]: De Arte Poetica, 39f.
[^14]: Sallust, De coniuratione Cat., i.
[^15]: This paragraph appears only in the Jena edition of Luther’s works (1567).
[^16]: Vergil, Aeneid, 2.324, 6.883, 7·3[^!]4? 10.465.
[^17]: Parcae.
[^18]: Aen,, 2.29if.
[^19]: iocus.
[^20]: super aristas graderis.
[^21]: larvam exlernam.
[^22]: frons.
[^23]: levem et imprudentem rabulam in aliquo suggesto declamantem.
[^24]: voluntas.
[^25]: noluntas.
[^26]: 'As in those who lack grace {special grace, 1 mean) reason is darkened but not destroyed, so it is probable that their power of will is not wholly destroyed, but has become ineffective for upright actions. ’
[^27]: oppositum in adiecto.
[^28]: quadrvplatorum.
[^29]: religiosissimitm.
[^30]: hie nodus in scirpo quaeritur.
