# III. Review of Erasmus' Introduction (W.A. 639–661)

### (i) That the authority of antiquity can be no sure proof of 'free-will' (639-649)

At the outset of the disputation proper, you pledge yourself *to argue from the canonical Scriptures, since Luther submits to the authority of no extra-canonical writer.* Thank you! I welcome that promise, even though you make it merely to save yourself fruitless labour and not because you judge those other writers immaterial for the matter in hand. For you do not quite approve of my—presumption, shall we say? or whatever it is that this principle of mine should be called. *You are much influenced* (you tell us) *by the great array of learned men, objects of many centuries’ unanimous acclaim, some of them expert Biblical scholars, some of them great saints, some martyrs, many renowned for miracles, plus the theologians of more recent times and an abundance of schools, councils, bishops and popes beside. In short* (you say) *there stands on your side scholarship, ability, numbers, dignity, distinction, courage, holiness, miracles and what not else, while on my side there is just Wycliffe and Laurentius Valla* (though Augustine, whom you do not mention, is entirely with me). *But these latter* (you say) *have no weight as compared with the others. Which leaves only Luther—a man of no standing, a youngster—together with his friends; who can boast no such scholarship, or ability, or numbers, or dignity, or holiness, or miracles. Why* (you say) *they could not cure a lame horse! They make a parade of Scripture, though they are as uncertain about it as their opponents; they boast of having the Spirit, but nowhere show it forth—*and there are other things which by dint of copious utterance you are able to enumerate. *So* (you conclude) *there is really nothing to us; as the wolf said to the nightingale that he had eaten: ‘You’re a voice—and that’s all!’ They speak; and for that reason alone* (you say) *they expect to be believed![^1]*

I grant, my good Erasmus, that you may well be influenced by these considerations. For more than ten years they so influenced me that I should not think any other mortal was ever so deeply moved by them. I, too, thought it incredible that this Troy of ours, so often assaulted and so long unconquered, could ever be taken. And I call God witness against my soul, that I would have continued so, and would be under their influence to-day, had not constraint of conscience and evidence of facts forced me on to a different road. Doubtless you can appreciate that my heart is not made of stone; and that, had it been stone, it could not but have been softened by the buffeting received in my struggle with the waves and the storms, as I dared to do that which, once done, must, as I saw, bring down the whole weight of the authority of those whom you have listed like a deluge upon my head. But this is no place for composing a history of my life and works. I did not undertake this debate with a view to self-advertisement, but in order that I might exalt the grace of God. What I am, and with what spirit and intent I have been caught up in these issues, I leave to the judgment of Him Who knows that all this has come to pass by His free-will, not mine— as the whole world should have realised long ago. This introduction of yours undoubtedly puts me in an invidious position, from which I cannot easily escape without exalting myself and slighting all these Fathers. Briefly, however, I will speak to it.

I am inferior in learning, ability, numbers, authority and everything else. Even you think so! But now, suppose I should ask you these three questions: what is the manifestation of the Spirit? what are miracles? and what is holiness? As far as I know you from your letters and books, you would stand revealed as such an ignorant simpleton that you could not utter a single syllable of explanation. Or suppose I should press the question, which of all those of whom you boast can you prove for certain to be, or to have been, a saint, or to have possessed the Spirit, or to have wrought miracles? I think you would sweat freely over your answer, and fruitlessly too! You say many things that are commonly accepted and publicly repeated in sermons; but you would not believe how much of their credibility and authority they lose when brought to the judgment of conscience. ‘Many are accounted saints on earth, whose souls are in hell,’ is a true proverb!

I will grant you, if you like (though you do not request it), that they all were saints, all had the Spirit, and all wrought miracles. But now tell me this: was any one of them a saint, did any one of them receive the Spirit, or work miracles, in the name of‘free-will’, or by the power of‘free-will,’or to confirm the doctrine of ‘free-will’? Far from it, you will say; all these things were done in the name and by the power of Jesus Christ, and to confirm the doctrine of Christ. But why, in that case, do you bring forward their holiness, possession of the Spirit, and miracles, to support the doctrine of ‘free-will’, which they were not wrought nor given to support? Their miracles, possession of the Spirit, and holiness, therefore, support us, who preach Jesus Christ, and not the strength or works of man.

And now, what wonder is it if those holy, spiritual, marvellous men were sometimes prepossessed by the flesh, and spoke and acted according to the flesh; when the selfsame thing happened more than once to the very apostles under Christ Himself? You do not deny—indeed, you assert—that ‘free-will’ is something with which neither the Spirit nor Christ have anything to do, but which is man’s affair. Therefore, the Spirit, who was promised to extol Christ, certainly cannot preach ‘free-will’. If, then, the fathers ever preached ‘free-will’, their words were certainly of the flesh (for they were but men) and not of the Spirit of God. Much less did they work miracles in confirmation of that doctrine! So your appeal to the holiness, the spirit and the miracles of the fathers is pointless; for what they prove is not ‘free-will’, but the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which contradicts the doctrine of ‘free-will’.

But come now, you that support ‘free-will’ and claim that the doctrine concerning it is true, that is, that it has come from the Spirit of God—do you here and now show forth the Spirit, work miracles and give evidence of holiness! You who make such a claim owe at least this much to us who deny it. The Spirit, holiness and miracles should not be required of us, who deny, but from you, who assert. A mere negative does not propound anything, is not anything, is not obliged to prove anything, and needs no proof itself; it is the affirmative that needs proving. You assert that the power of ‘free-will’ is a fact in man. But no miracle from God has ever yet been seen or heard of in support of any doctrine about what is fact in man; miracles are only given to support doctrines that tell us facts about God! And we are instructed in Deut. 18 to receive no doctrine at all that is not first proved by signs from God (v. 22). Indeed, Scripture calls man ‘vanity’ and ‘a lie’; which is just to say that all that is human is vanity, and lies! Come, then, come, I say, and prove that this doctrine of yours about a mere human vanity and lie is true! Where, now, is your demonstration of the Spirit? Where is your holiness? Where are your miracles? I see your abilities, your learning and your authority; but these are things that God has given to all the world alike. Come, then! We shall not compel you to work great miracles, nor to cure a lame horse, lest you should plead in excuse the carnality of the age (though God is wont to confirm His doctrine by miracles without respect to the carnality of the age; what moves Him is not the merits or demerits of a carnal age, but just mercy, and grace, and love of the souls that are to be established by solid truth unto their glory). You may choose to work as tiny a miracle as you like. Indeed, to prod your Baal into action, I here challenge and defy you to create a single frog in the name and by the power of ‘free-will’! Why, the godless heathen Magi in Egypt could create frogs in abundance! (Note that I shall not burden you with the task of making lice, which not even they could produce!) I will suggest a more trifling matter still: take a single flea or louse—since you tempt and mock our God i with your talk of curing a lame horse—take that, and combine all the powers and concentrate all the energies both of your god and of all your supporters; and if, in the name and by the power of ‘free-will’, you can kill it, you shall be conquerors, your cause shall be established, and we will at once come and adore that god of yours, the amazing louse-slaughterer! (Not that I would deny that you can remove even mountains; but it is one thing to say that a work was done by the power of ‘free-will’, and another thing to prove it.)

And what I have said of miracles I say of holiness also: If, out of the great lists of ages, men and all the other things you enumerated, you can point to a single work (if only the lifting of a straw from the ground), or a single word (if only the syllable *my), or* a single thought (if only the faintest sigh), " springing from the power of ‘free-will’, by which men applied ! themselves to grace, or merited the Spirit, or obtained pardon, or prevailed with God in the slightest degree (I say nothing of being sanctified thereby), once more you shall be the victors, and we the vanquished. *Done in the name and by the power of free-will’,* I say; for there is abundant Scripture testimony to what is wrought in men by the power of Divine creation. And your party is unquestionably obliged to point out such a case; lest you should stand revealed as such ludicrous teachers that you broadcast throughout the world, with all the arrogance and authority you can command, doctrines concerning something of whose existence you cannot produce a single token. Your doctrines will be called inconsequential dreams—which is learned, holy, and miraculous, whose support you invoke! And then we shall have more respect for the Stoics than for you; for though they took it on them to describe such a wise man as they never saw, yet they did try to delineate some part of their ideal. But you can delineate nothing at all, not even the shadow of your doctrine!

I say the same of the Spirit too: If out of all the protagonists of ‘free-will’ you can produce one who had that modicum of strength of mind and heart which he needed to be able to disregard a single farthing, or to go without a single farthing, or to bear a single word or token of affront (I say nothing of despising riches, life and fame), and this in the name and by the power of ‘free-will’, once more the palm of victory shall be yours, and we will gladly admit defeat.[^2] And such a concrete example you, who are so loud and proud in trumpeting forth the power of ‘free-will’, are bound to show us; otherwise you will once more stand revealed as setting up a will-o’-the-wisp, and doing as did the man who went to see a play in an empty theatre![^3]

In fact, I can easily prove to you the exact opposite of your position: namely, that whenever such holy men as you boast of approach God to pray or deal with Him, they approach Him in utter forgetfulness of their ‘free-will’; in self-despair they cry to Him for pure grace alone, as something far other than they deserve. Augustine was often thus; so was Bernard when, at the point of death, he said: “I have wasted my time, for I have lived a waster’s life.”[^4] I see no mention here of a power that could apply itself to grace; all power is here condemned, because it was entirely turned away from grace. Admittedly, these selfsame saints, when engaged in argument, spoke of ‘free-will’ iii a different strain. But that just illustrates what I see to be a universal experience: men are different when occupied with words and disputations from what they are when occupied with experience and practice.[^5] In the former case, their speech does not accord with what they previously felt; in the latter, their feelings do not accord with what they previously said. Men should therefore be assessed, godly and ungodly alike, rather by what they feel than by what they say.

But we grant you more yet. We will not ask of you miracles, or the Spirit, or holiness. Let us return to the doctrine itself. We ask of you only this: that you will just explain to us what work, word or thought your power of ‘free-will’ can evoke, or endeavour, or accomplish, so as to apply itself to grace. It is not enough to say, ‘there is power! there is power! there is power in “free-will”.’ What is more easily said? But this is not the way of those most holy and learned men, the objects of so many centuries’ acclaim! You must name the child (as they say in the German proverb); you must define what this power is, what it can do, what is done to it, what happens to it. For instance—I will put it very crudely—we want to know whether this power ought, or whether it tries, to pray, or fast, or work, or weary the body, or give alms. For if it is a power, it must do some work! But here you are more dumb than Seriphian frogs and fishes. And how are you going to define this power, when on your own testimony you yourselves are still undecided about it, differing among each other and inconsistent with yourselves? What can be done about a definition, when the very subject of it is not self-consistent?

And suppose that, after Plato’s years have gone by, you find yourselves at last agreed about this power, and its work is then defined as praying, or fasting, or some such thing (perhaps it still lies hid among Plato’s ideas)—who will assure us that your view is true, that it pleases God, and that we are right and safe jn adopting it? Especially when you yourselves acknowledge that this is a fact about man, with which the testimony of the Spirit does not deal; for it was in the world, and discussed by philosophers, before ever Christ came or the Spirit was sent down from heaven. It is quite certain that this doctrine was not sent down from heaven, but sprang from the earth long before; weighty testimony is therefore needed to establish it as sure and true.

Allowing, then, that we on our side lack standing and are few, while you on yours are public figures and are many; that we lack education, while you are thoroughly learned; that we are stupid, while you are brilliant; that we were born yesterday, while you are older than Deucalion; that we never won public acknowledgment, while you have been acclaimed by many generations; that, in sum, we are sinners, carnal men and dolts, while you, by reason of your holiness, possession of the Spirit, and miracles, are fit to strike awe into the very devils; yet, for all that, grant us at least the right of Turks and Jews, to ask you to give the reason for your doctrine, as your friend Peter told you to do (cf. i Pet. 3.15). We make our request with the greatest moderation; that is to say, we do not demand that your doctrine be proved by holiness, or by possession of the Spirit, or by miracles (which yet we could do, by the same right with which you demand these things of others); why, we even grant you that you need not produce a single instance of a work, or word, or thought as evidence for your doctrine; you need only explain the doctrine to us, and just tell us what you would have it taken to mean, and in what form we are to understand it— and if you will not or cannot do this, then at least let us try to produce an example of it ourselves! You are as bad as the Pope and his men, who say: ‘Do as we *say,* but don’t do as we *do!’* Similarly, you say: ‘this power requires that work be done;’ so *we* shall prepare for action, while *you* remain at ease! Shall we not gain even this one request from you ? The more numerous you are, the longer established you are, the more distinguished you are, the more universal your superiority over us, so much the more is it a disgrace to you that when we, who on all counts are as nothing in your eyes, want to learn and practice your doctrine, you cannot prove it, either by a miracle—even the slaughter of a louse—or by the least motion of the Spirit, or by the tiniest work of sanctity; nor can you point to a single instance, either of word or deed, that exemplifies it; and, further (and this is an unheard-of thing), you cannot even formulate it, nor tell us the meaning of your doctrine! O frivolous teachers of‘free-will’! What are you now, but *'a voice— and that’s all’?* Who are they now, Erasmus, who *‘boast of the Spirit, but have nothing to show’·,* who *‘speak only, and straightway want men to believe them’* ? Are they not the members of your own party, whom you have exalted thus to high heaven? You do not even speak; yet what grandiose claims and demands you make! In Christ’s name, therefore, we entreat you and yours, my good Erasmus, at least to allow us to be terrified at this peril to our conscience, and to tremble for fear, and at any rate to defer our assent to a doctrine which, as you yourself see, is nothing but an empty term and sound of syllables—‘There is power in “free-will”! there is power in “free-will”!’ And even if you completely succeed in proving and establishing all your arguments, it will still be nothing more. Why, it is still a matter of doubt among your own party whether the term means something or nothing; for they differ from each other, and are inconsistent with themselves. It is utterly iniquitous therefore, and the greatest pity in the world by far, that our consciences, which Christ redeemed by His blood, should be troubled by the ghost of this one little word, and a word of no certain meaning at that. And then, if we do not allow ourselves to be thus troubled, we are charged with unheard-of pride for slighting so many Fathers of so many centuries, who affirmed ‘free-will’! But, as you see from what has been said, the truth is rather that they never defined anything at all concerning ‘free-will’, and the doctrine of ‘free-will’ is erected under cover of their reputation, though they cannot describe it, nor fix its name. Thus with a lying word men befool the world!

And here, Erasmus, I invoke your own advice, given above, that *questions of this kind be left alone, and that Christ crucified, and as much as suffices for Christian piety, be taught instead.* But this is what we have long been desiring, and doing. What else do we contend for, but that the simplicity and purity of Christian doctrine should prevail, and that what men have invented and brought in along with it should be left behind and disregarded? But you, who give us this advice, do not take it yourself; you do the opposite; you write Diatribes; you cry up the decrees of Popes; you vaunt the authority of men; you try every means of carrying us off into these strange pastures and foisting upon us things both unscriptural and unnecessary, so that we may spoil the simplicity and sincerity of Christian piety, and disorder it with man-made additions. From which we easily see that your advice to us did not come from your heart, and that you do not write anything in a serious spirit, but with the self-confidence of one who thinks that by the empty bubbles of his words he can lead the world where he pleases. In fact, however, you lead it nowhere; for you utter nothing at all but unadulterated contradictions, on every subject and at every stage; and one would be absolutely right to call you Proteus, or Vertumnus, in person,[^6] and to say to you, in Christ’s words, ‘Physician, heal thyself!’ (Luke 4.23). It is a disgrace to a teacher when his own error confutes himself!

Until you have proved your affirmative, then, we stand fast upon our negative. And we appeal to the judgment of all that company of saints of whom you boast—to the whole world, rather—as we make bold to say, and glory in saying, that we ought not to acknowledge something which is nothing, when no certain demonstration of what it is can be given; and that you are all in the grip of incredible presumption or madness when you demand that we should acknowledge it—and that for no other reason than that you, who are many, mighty and long-established, are pleased to assert something which you yourselves admit to be nothing! As though it were fit conduct for Christian teachers to befool poor people in matters of religion with something which is nothing, as if it were of great moment for their salvation! Where, now, is your shrewd wit of Greek genius? Once you had it, when you used to construct your falsehoods with at least a fair exterior; but here you lie bare-faced and in plain speech! Where is your stylish Latin (laboriously modelled on Greek), now thus fooling, and being fooled, over an utterly empty term ? But this is what happens to thoughtless and evil-hearted readers of books: they assign the highest authority to all the things that were marks of infirmity in the fathers and the saints. The fault here is not in the authors, but in the readers. It is as though, on the ground of the holiness and authority of St. Peter, one should argue that all that St. Peter ever said was true, and that it was truth even when, from weakness of the flesh, he urged Christ not to suffer (see Matt. 16 [v. 22]), and when he told Christ to depart from him out of the ship (Luke 5.8), and on the many other occasions when he was rebuked by Christ Himself.

Such men are like those who for fun idly say that not everything that is in the Gospel is true, and pick on the occasion in John 8 (v. 48) when the Jews said to Christ: ‘Do we not say well that thou art a Samaritan and hast a devil?’—or: ‘He is guilty of death’ (Matt. 26.66)—or: ‘We found this fellow perverting our nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar’ (Luke 23.2). These protagonists of‘free-will’ do the same thing, but with a different end in view; not deliberately, like those I mentioned, but in blindness and ignorance; for they pick on what the fathers, stumbling in the weakness of their flesh, said in favour of ‘free-will’, and go on to oppose it to what the same fathers, in the power of the Spirit, said elsewhere against ‘free-will’; and they so press and force the issue that the better falls before the worse. So it comes to pass that they give authority to the inferior statements, because these make in favour of their own carnal opinion, and deny it to the better statements, because these make against that carnal opinion. But why do we not rather select the better statements ? There are many such in the fathers! To take an example: what can be said that is more carnal, more utterly godless, sacrilegious and blasphemous, than what Jerome is wont to say: “Virginity peoples heaven, marriage earth”[^7]—as though earth, not heaven, is the right place for the patriarchs, apostles and Christian husbands, and heaven for pagan vestal virgins without Christ! Yet is it these sentiments, and others like them, that the Sophists collect from the fathers to get themselves authority—for their weapon is numbers, rather than judgment. So did that idiotic Faber of Constance, who has just presented the public with his precious jewel, that is, his Augean stable[^8]—thus ensuring that there might be something to make the godly learned feel sick, and vomit!

### (ii) That the true church, which is hidden from man’s view, does not err (649-652)

In passing, I will here reply to the passage where you describe it as *unbelievable that God should overlook an error in His church for so many ages, and not reveal to any of His saints a point which we maintain to be fundamental in Christian doctrine.* In the first place, we do not say that God tolerated this error in His church, or in any of His saints. For the church is ruled by the Spirit of God, and Rom. 8 tells us that the saints are led by the Spirit of God (v. 14). And Christ abides with His church till the end of the world (Matt. 28.20). And the church is the pillar and ground of the truth (1 Tim. 3.15). This we know; for the Creed which we all hold runs thus, T believe in the *holy* catholic church.’ So it is impossible that she should err in even the least article. Even should we grant that some of the elect are held in error throughout their whole life, yet they must of necessity return into the way before they die; for Christ says in John 8: ‘None shall pluck them out of my hand’ (John 10.28). But what is hard and problematical is just this: ascertaining whether those whom you call the church were the church—or, rather, whether after their lifetime of error they were at last brought back to the truth before they died. It does not at once follow that, if God suffered all those consummate scholars whom you quote to err throughout so many ages, therefore He suffered His church to err! Look at Israel, the people of God. There, out of a great number of kings over a long period of time, not one king is mentioned who did not err. Under Elijah the prophet, all the people and every public institution among them had gone astray into idolatry, so that he thought he was the only one left; yet, while the kings and princes, priests and prophets, and all that could be called the people and church of God, were going to ruin, God had reserved seven thousand to Himself (cf. 1 Kings 19.18). But who saw them, or knew them to be the people of God? And who will dare to deny that in our day, under these principal men of yours (for you only mention persons of public office and of great name), God has kept to Himself a church among the common people, while allowing all whom you mention to perish like the kingdom of Israel? For it is God’s prerogative to bring down the chosen ones of Israel, and, as Ps. 77 says, to slay their fat ones (Ps. 78.31); but to preserve the dregs and remnant of Israel, according to Isaiah’s words (cf. Isa. 10.22).

What happened under Christ Himself, when all the apostles were offended at Him, when He was denied and condemned by all the people, and only Joseph, Nicodemus and the thief on the cross were preserved? Was it not the former group who were then called the people of God? Indeed, there was a people of God remaining, but it was not so called; and that which was so called was not it. Who knows whether, throughout the whole course of world history from its beginning, the state of the church has not always been such that some were called the people and saints of God who were not so, while others, who were among them as a remnant, were the people and saints of God, but were not so called?—as appears from the histories of Cain and Abel, Ishmael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob. Look at the time of the Arians, when scarcely five catholic bishops were preserved in the whole world, and they were driven from their sees, while the Arians reigned everywhere, taking to themselves the public name and office of the church. Yet under these heretics Christ preserved His church; though in such a way that it was not for a moment thought or held to be the church.

Or show me a single bishop discharging his office under the kingdom of the Pope. Show me a single council at which they dealt with matter of religion, and not with gowns, rank, revenues and other profane trifles instead, which only a lunatic could consider the province of the Holy Ghost! Yet they are called the church, despite the fact that all who live as they do are lost, and are anything but the church. Even under them, however, Christ has preserved His church, though not so as to be called the church. How many saints do you think the Inquisitors alone have in time past burned and killed for heretical perversions, such as John Hus and those like him? And many holy men of the same spirit doubtless lived in their day.

Why do you not rather marvel at this, Erasmus: Since the world began, there have always been superior talents, greater learning, and a more intense earnestness among pagans than among Christians and the people of God. It is as Christ Himself acknowledges: ‘the sons of this world are wiser than the sons of light’ (Luke 16.8). What Christian can be compared with Cicero alone (to say nothing of the Greeks) for ability, learning and hard work? What then shall we say hindered them from finding grace? For they certainly exerted ‘free-will’ to the utmost of their power! Who dare say that not one among them pursued truth with all his heart? Yet we are bound to maintain that not one of them reached it. Will you say in this case too that it is unbelievable that God abandoned so many great men throughout the whole course of history and let them strive in vain ? Certainly, if ‘free-will’ has any being and power at all, its being and power must have been present with such men as these, in some one case at least! But it availed nothing; indeed, it always wrought in the wrong direction; so that by this argument alone it can be proved clearly enough that ‘free-will’ is nothing at all, inasmuch as one can show no trace of it from beginning to end of the world!

But I return to the matter in hand. What wonder, if God should leave all the great men of the church to go their own ways, when He thus allowed all the nations to go their own ways, as Paul says in Acts (cf. Acts 14.16) ? My good Erasmus, God’s church is not so common a thing as the term ‘God’s church’; nor are God’s saints so promiscuously found as the phrase ‘God’s saints.’ The saints are pearls and precious jewels, which the Spirit does not cast before swine; but (as Scripture puts it) He keeps them hid, that the wicked may not see the glory of God! Else, if they were open to the recognition of all, how could they be so vexed and afflicted in the world as they are ? So Paul says: ‘Had they known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory’ (1 Cor. 2.8).

I do not say this because I deny that those whom you cite are the saints and church of God; but because it cannot be proved that they really are saints, should anyone deny it; it is left completely uncertain; which means that no position is sufficiently guaranteed by their holiness to make good any doctrine. I call them saints, and so regard them; I call them the church, and so judge them—but by the rule of charity, not by the rule of faith. By which I mean that charity, which always thinks the best of everyone, and is not suspicious, but believes and assumes all good of its neighbour, calls every baptized person a saint. There is no danger involved if she is wrong; it is the way of charity to be deceived, for she is open to all the uses and abuses of every man, as being handmaid of all, good and bad, believing and unbelieving, true and false. Faith, however, calls none a saint but him who is proclaimed such by divine sentence; for the way of faith is not to be deceived. Therefore, though we should all look on each other as saints as a matter of charity, none should be declared a saint as a matter of faith, as if it were an article of faith that so-and-so is a saint. (In this way, that adversary of God, the Pope, canonizes as saints men of his own choice, whom he never knew, so setting himself in God’s place [cf. 2 Thess. 2.4].) All that I say of those saints of yours—ours, rather—is this: that, since they differ among themselves, those should rather have been followed who spoke best (that is, for grace against ‘free-will’), leaving aside those who through weakness of the flesh testified of the flesh rather than of the Spirit. So, too, in the case of those who are inconsistent, the places where they speak from the Spirit should have been picked out and held fast, and those where they savour of the flesh let go. This is the right course for the Christian reader, as being the clean beast that parts the hoof and chews the cud (cf. Lev. 11.3; Deut. 14.6)! But as it is we abandon our judgment and swallow everything indiscriminately; or else (what is more wretched still) we reject the better and acclaim the worse in one and the same author, and proceed to affix to those same worse parts the title and authority of his sanctity—which he gained, not by reason of ‘free-will’ or the flesh, but by reason of that which is best of all, even of the Spirit only!

### (iii) That all doctrines must be tested and judged by Scripture (652-653)

What then shall we do? The church is hidden away, the saints are out of sight; what and whom shall we believe ? As you yourself argue, and with great point, *‘Who gives us assurance? How shall we detect the Spirit? If you regard learning, you find Rabbis in both camps; if you regard life, you find sinners in both camps; if you turn your eyes to Scripture, both sides claim it as their own. Furthermore, our controversy is not merely over Scripture (which is somewhat deficient in clarity at present), but over the precise meaning of Scripture; and here not the numbers, learning and distinction on the one side, much less the paucity, ignorance and lack of distinction on the other, can advance either cause?* The matter is therefore left in doubt, and the case remains *sub judice,* so that it looks as if our most sensible course is to concur with the views of the Sceptics!—unless we follow your own masterly policy of saying you are in doubt and professing that you seek truth and are trying to learn it, while at the same time giving allegiance to the party that asserts ‘free-will’, until the truth becomes plain! Here is my answer to you. What you say is part of the truth, but not all of it. It is true that we shall not detect the spirits by appeals to learning, life, abilities, majorities, distinction, or to ignorance and lack of education, or numbers, or standing. However, I do not applaud those who take refuge in bragging about the Spirit. I fought last year, and am still fighting, a pretty fierce campaign against those fanatics who subject the Scriptures to the interpretation of their own spirit. On the same account I have thus far hounded the Pope, in whose kingdom nothing is more commonly said or more widely accepted than this dictum: ‘the Scriptures are obscure and equivocal; we must seek the interpreting Spirit from the apostolic see of Rome!’ No more disastrous words could be spoken; for by this means ungodly men have exalted themselves above the Scriptures and done what they liked, till the Scriptures were completely trodden down and we could believe and teach nothing but maniacs’ dreams. In a word, that dictum is no mere human invention; it is poison sent into the world by the inconceivably malevolent prince of all the devils himself!

This is our contention: that spirits must be detected and tried by a double judgment. The first is internal. By it, through the enlightening of the Holy Ghost, the special gift of God, one enjoys complete certainty in judging of and deciding between the doctrines and opinions of all men as they affect oneself and one’s own personal salvation. Of this judgment it is said in i Cor. i: ‘The spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is judged by no man’ (i Cor. 2.15). It belongs to faith, and is needful for every Christian, even for a layman. This is what we earlier spoke of as the *internal perspicuity of Holy Scripture.* Perhaps this was in the mind of those who answered you by saying that everything must be decided by the judgment of the Spirit.[^9]But this judgment benefits none but him who has it, and is not our concern in this present debate. Nor, I think, does anyone doubt its reality.

The second is an external judgment. By it, we judge the spirits and doctrines of all men, also with the greatest certainty, and not now for ourselves only, but also for the benefit and salvation of others. This judgment is the province of the public ministry of the Word and the external office, and is the special concern of teachers and preachers of the Word. We employ it when we strengthen the weak in faith and refute opponents. We spoke of this earlier as the *external perspicuity of Holy Scripture.* We hold that all spirits should be proved in the sight of the church by the judgment of Scripture. For it should be settled as fundamental, and most firmly fixed in the minds of Christians, that the Holy Scriptures are a spiritual light far brighter even than the sun, especially in what relates to salvation and all essential matters.

### (iv) That the teaching of Scripture is clear and decisive (653-658)

But because we have been so long persuaded of the opposite, by that pestilent dictum of the Sophists, that the Scriptures are obscure and equivocal, we are compelled to begin by proving this very first principle of ours, by which all else must be proved (a procedure which to philosophers would seem irrational and impossible!).

First, Moses says in Deut. 17 (v. 8) that, if a difficult matter comes into judgment, men must go to the place which God has chosen for His name, and there consult the priests, who are to ( judge it according to the law of the Lord. .‘According to the law , of the Lord,’ he says; but how will they thus judge, if the law of the Lord is not, externally, as clear as can be, so that they may be satisfied about it? Else it would have been enough to say: /‘according to their own spirit!’ Why, under any and every government all issues between all parties are settled by the laws. But how could they be settled if the laws were not perfectly clear, and were truly as lights among the people ? If the laws were equivocal and uncertain, not only would no issues be settled, but no sure standards of conduct would exist. It is for this very reason that laws are enacted, that conduct may be regulated according to a definite code and disputes may find settlement. It is necessary, therefore, that that which is to be the measure and yardstick for others, as the law is, should be much clearer and more certain than anything else. If laws need to be luminous and definite in secular societies, where only temporal issues are concerned, and such laws have in fact been bestowed by Divine bounty upon all the world, how should He not give to Christians, His own people and His elect, laws and rules of much greater clarity and certainty by which to adjust and settle themselves and all issues between them? For He wills that His people should not set store by temporal things! ‘If God so clothe the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven,’ how much more us (cf. Matt. 6.30) ? But let us go on, and overwhelm this pestilent saying of the Sophists with passages of Scripture.

Ps. 18 (Ps. 19.8) says: ‘The commandment of the Lord is clear (or pure), enlightening the eyes.’ I am sure that what enlightens the eyes is neither obscure nor equivocal!

Again, Ps. 118 (Ps. 119.130) says: ‘The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding to babes.’ Here it says of God’s words, that they are an entrance, something open, which is plainly set before all and enlightens even babes.

Isa. 8 (v. 20) despatches all questions ‘to the law and to the testimony,’ and threatens that unless we comply the light of dawn must be denied us.

In Zech. 2 (Mai. 2.7), God commands that they should seek the law from the mouth of the priest; ‘for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.’ But what a fine messenger and spokesman from God would he be, who should deliver messages that were unclear to himself and obscure to the people, so that he did not know what he was saying, nor they what they were hearing!

And what is more commonly said in praise of Scripture through, the whole Old Testament, especially in the 118th Psalm (Ps. 119), than that it is in itself a most clear, sure light? That Psalm makes mention of its clearness in these words ‘Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths’ (v. 105). The Psalmist does not say: ‘thy Spirit alone is a lamp unto my feet,’ though he assigns to the Spirit His part when he says: ‘thy good spirit shall lead me into the land of uprightness’ (Ps. 143.10). Thus Scripture is called a *way* and *a path,* doubtless by reason of its entire certainty.

Come to the New Testament. Paul says in Rom. i that the gospel was promised ‘by the prophets in the holy scriptures’ (v. 2), and in the third chapter that the righteousness of faith was ‘testified by the law and the prophets’ (v. 21). But what sort of testifying is it, if it is obscure? Yet throughout all his epistles Paul depicts the gospel as a word of light, a gospel of clarity, and makes this point with great fulness in 2 Cor. 3 and 4, where he treats of the perspicuity of both Moses and Christ in a very exalted manner.

Peter says in 2 Pet. 1: ‘We have a most sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place’ (v. 19). Here Peter makes the Word of God to be a bright lamp, all else being darkness. Should we then make obscurity and darkness out of the Word ?

Christ repeatedly calls Himself ‘the light of the world’ (cf. John 8.12, 9.5) and John the Baptist ‘a burning and a shining light’ (John 5.35). This, doubtless, was not on account of the holiness of his life, but by reason of his word. So Paul calls the Thessalonians shining lights of the world, because, he says, ‘you hold forth the word of life’ (Phil. 2.15-16). For fife without the word is unsure and dark.

And what are the apostles doing when they prove what they preach by the Scriptures ? Is it that they want to hide their own darkness under greater darkness? Are they trying to prove what is better known by what is less well known? What is Christ doing when in John 5 he teaches the Jews to ‘search the Scriptures,’ because they testify of Him (v. 39) ? Did he want to make them uncertain about faith in Himself? What were those mentioned in Acts 17 doing, who, after hearing Paul, read the Scriptures night and day to see ‘whether those things were so’ (v. 11) ? Does not all this prove that the apostles, like Christ Himself, appealed to Scripture as the clearest witness to the truth of what they were saying? With what conscience, then, do we make them to be obscure ?

Tell me, are these words of Scripture obscure or equivocal: ‘God created the heavens and the earth’ (Gen. 1.1): ‘the Word was made flesh’ (John 1.14): and all the other items which the whole world has received as articles of faith ? Whence were they received? Surely, from the Scriptures! What do preachers today do ? They expound and proclaim the Scriptures! But if the Scripture they proclaim is obscure, who will assure us that their proclamation is dependable ? Shall there be a further new proclamation to assure us? But who will make that proclamation? (At this rate we shall go on *ad infinitum!)*

In a word: if Scripture is obscure or equivocal, why need it have been brought down to us by act of God ? Surely we have enough obscurity and uncertainty within ourselves, without our obscurity and uncertainty and darkness being augmented from heaven! And how then shall the apostle’s word stand: ‘All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction?’ (2 Tim. 3.16). No, no, Paul, you are altogether unprofitable; such blessings as you ascribe to Scripture must be sought from the fathers, who have found acceptance down the long line of the ages, and from the see of Rome. You must revoke the judgment which you express when you write to Titus that a bishop should be mighty in sound doctrine, to exhort, and convince gainsayers, and stop the mouths of vain talkers and deceitful teachers (Tit. 1.9E); for how shall he be mighty, when you leave him Scriptures that are obscure—arms of tow, and feeble straws for a sword? Christ, too, must needs revoke the words in which he falsely promises us: ‘I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries shall not be able to resist’ (Luke 21.15). For they are bound to resist, when we fight them with mere uncertainties and obscurities! And why do you, Erasmus, draw up an outline of Christianity for us, if the Scriptures are obscure to you ?

I am sure that I have already made myself burdensome, even to slow-witted readers, by dwelling so long and spending so much strength on a point that is as clear as can be. But I had to do it in order to overthrow that shameless blasphemy that the Scriptures are obscure; so that even you, my good Erasmus, might see what you are saying when you deny that Scripture is clear. In the same breath you ought to be telling me that all those saints whom you quote must needs be much less clear; for who gives us information about the light that was in them, if you make the Scriptures to be obscure? Those who deny the perfect clarity and plainness of the Scriptures leave us nothing but darkness.

Here you may say: all this is nothing to me. I do not say that the Scriptures are obscure at every point (who would be such a fool as to say that?), but just on this point, and on those like it. I reply: my remarks are not aimed at you only, but at all who hold such views. Against you particularly, I would say of the whole of Scripture that I do not allow any part of it to be called obscure. There stands within it the statement which we quoted from Peter, that the word of God is to us a lamp shining in a dark place. If part of the lamp does not shine, then it is a part of the dark place rather than of the lamp! When he enlightened us, Christ did not intend that part of His Word should be left obscure to us, for He commands us to mark the Word; and this command is pointless if the Word is not clear.

So if the doctrine of ‘free-will’ is obscure or ambiguous, then it is no concern of Christians, nor of the Scriptures, and should be left alone entirely and classed among the fables which Paul condemns in contentious Christians (cf. i Tim. 4.7). But if it is a matter of concern to Christians and to the Scriptures, then it ought to be clear, open and plain, just like all the other articles, which are perfectly plain. All the articles which Christians hold Should be both fully certain to themselves, and also supported against opponents by such plain and clear Scriptures as to stop all their mouths, so that they can say nothing in reply. This was the burden of Christ’s promise to us: ‘I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries shall not be able to resist.’ But if our mouth is weak at this point, so that our adversaries can resist, His statement that no adversary should be able to resist our mouth is false. On this doctrine of ‘freewill’, therefore, either we shall have no adversaries (which will be the case if it is not our business), or, if it is our business, we shall have adversaries, certainly, but such as shall not be able to resist us.

However, this inability of our adversaries to resist (I deal with it, since it has come up here) does not mean that they are forced to abandon their view, or persuaded to acknowledge the truth, or to be silent. Who can force men against their will to believe, or confess their error, or be silent? ‘What chatters more than an empty head ?’ says Augustine *(De Civ. Dei.* 5.26). What is meant by their mouth being stopped is that they have nothing to say in reply, and though they may say a great deal in reply, yet the judgment of common sense is that they say nothing. This is best demonstrated by examples.

When Christ in Matt. 22 silenced the Sadducees (vv. 23ff.), by proving the resurrection of the dead with a Scripture quotation from Moses in Exod. 3 (‘ “I am the god of Abraham,” etc. [Exod. 3.6]; He is not the God of the dead, but of the living’), they were not able to resist or gainsay. But did they therefore give up their view? How often did He confute the Pharisees with the plaintest Scriptures and arguments, so that the people could clearly see that they were worsted, and indeed they knew it themselves? None the less, they continued to oppose Him.

Stephen so spoke, Acts 7 tells us, that, on Luke’s testimony ‘they could not resist the spirit and wisdom with which he spake’ (Acts 6.10). But what did they do? Yield? No! Maddened by mortification at being worsted, and by their own inability to resist, they shut their ears and eyes and suborned false witnesses against him (6.1 if.). See how he confutes his opponents as he stands before the council! Having listed God’s mercies from the beginning of the nation’s life and proved that God never commanded a temple to be built for Him (for that was what he was on trial about; the dispute centred there), at length he grants that there was a temple built under Solomon. Then he takes up that point as follows: ‘But the Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands.’ To prove it, he quotes from chapter 66 of the prophet Isaiah, ‘What is the house that ye build unto me?’ (v. 1). Tell me, now, what could they reply against so plain a Scripture? Yet they continued unmoved in attachment to their own view. Whereupon he attacks them directly, saying: ‘Ye uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost,’ etc. He says that they do resist, though they could not resist.

Come to our own day. John Hus preached against the Pope from Matt. 16[^10]: ‘ “The gates of hell shall not prevail against my church” (v. 18). Is there any obscurity or ambiguity here? But the gates of hell do prevail against the Pope and his men, for they are notorious throughout the world for their open impiety and crimes. Is there anything obscure about that? Therefore the Pope and his men are not the church of which Christ speaks.’ What could they gainsay here ? How could they resist the mouth that Christ had given him? But they did resist, and persisted till they burnt him; so far were they from abandoning their views. Christ declares that this will happen when He says: ‘Your *adversaries* shall not be able to resist.’ They are adversaries, He says; so they will resist; else they would not be adversaries, but would become friends. Yet He says ‘they shall not be able to resist.’ What is this but to say that their actual resistance will show their inability to resist ?

And if I too shall succeed in so confuting ‘free-will’ that my adversaries cannot resist, even though they persist in their views and, despite the protests of conscience, resist still, then I shall have done enough. For I know well enough by experience how reluctant we all are to admit defeat. As Quintilian says, there Is none who would not rather appear to know than to learn. And this remains true, despite the proverbial refrain which all ground us keep mouthing (more because it is in popular use, or rather misuse, than because it expresses their heart): Ί want to learn; I am ready to be taught and to follow the better when **I** am told it; I am man, and prone to err.’ But under this mask, this fair semblance of humility, they may then confidently say: ‘I am not satisfied. I do not grasp it. He does violence to the Scriptures. He asserts so obstinately’—taking it for granted, you see, that none will ever suspect such humble souls of obstinately resisting and vigorously assailing what they know to be true! And they take this line so that their failure to give in may have to be put down, not to ill-will, but to the obscurity and equivocation of our arguments! The Greek philosophers behaved in a similar way: rather than that one should admit defeat at the hands of another, they began to deny first principles, as Aristotle tells us. Yet all the time we cheerfully persuade ourselves and others that there are many good men in the world who will gladly embrace the truth if someone makes it plain; and that we must not suppose that so many scholars over so many centuries were all astray and ignorant. As if we did not know that the world is the kingdom of Satan, where, over and above the natural blindness engendered from our flesh, we are under the dominion of evil spirits, and are hardened in our very blindness, fast bound in a darkness that is no more human, but devilish!

### (v) That the blindness of man does not disprove the clarity of Scripture (658-659)

*‘But,’* you say, *‘if Scripture is clear, why is it that men of superior ability throughout so many ages have been blind at this point?’*

I reply: They were thus blind for the praise and the glory of‘free-will’, so that this highly-vaunted ‘power by which a man can apply himself to things that concern eternal salvation’ might be shown up for what it is—namely, a power which neither sees what it sees, nor hears what it hears, much less understands those things, or seeks after them. To it apply the words which Christ and the evangelists so often quote from Isaiah: ‘Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive’ (6.9). What is this but to say that ‘free-will’ (or, the human heart) is so bound by the power of Satan that, unless it be wondrously quickened by the Spirit of God, it cannot of itself see or hear things which strike upon ear and eye so manifestly that they could almost be touched by hand? So great is the misery and blindness of mankind! Thus, too, the very evangelists, when they wondered how it could be that the Jews were not won by the works and words of Christ, incontrovertible and undeniable as they were, answered themselves from that self-same passage of Scripture, which teaches that man, left to himself, seeing sees not and hearing hears not. What is more fantastic ? ‘The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not’ (John 1.5). Who would believe it? Who ever heard of such a thing?— that light should shine in darkness, yet the darkness remain darkness, and not receive illumination!

Thus it is no wonder that in so many ages men of superior ability should be blind concerning the things of God. Such ignorance would be surprising on the human plane; but in the realm of divine things it would be more surprising if one or two were *not* blind! That all should be completely blind is no wonder at all. For what is mankind in the mass, without the Spirit, but the devil’s kingdom, as I said, a disordered chaos of darkness ? Hence Paul calls the demons ‘rulers of this darkness’ (Eph. 6.12), and tells us in i Cor. i that none of the princes of this world knew the wisdom of God (i Cor. 2.8). What do you think is his opinion of the rest of men, when he tells us that the very princes of this world are slaves of darkness? And by ‘princes’ he means men of the first rank and the highest distinction—those whom you call men of superior ability! Why were all the Arians blind? Were there not among them men of superior ability? Why is Christ foolishness to the Gentiles? Are there not men of superior ability among the Gentiles ? Why is He a stumbling-block to the Jews? Were there not men of superior ability among the Jews? ‘God knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain,’ says Paul (1 Cor. 3.20). He would not say ‘of men,’ as his text has it (cf. Ps. 94.11), but specifies the first and greatest among men, from whom we may form a judgment of the rest. But I hope to deal with this more Lully later. Let it suffice for now to have laid down, by way of introduction, that the Scriptures are perfectly clear in their teaching, and that by their help such a defence of our position may be made that our adversaries cannot resist; and that what cannot be thus defended is not our business, and is of no concern to Christians. Any who cannot see the aforementioned clarity, and blindly stumble in the sunlight of Scripture, thereby reveal, if they are godless, how mighty is the dominion and power of Satan over the sons of men, which prevents them hearing and grasping the plainest words of God, and makes them like men whom an illusionist has mesmerised[^11] into thinking that the sun is a cold cinder, or believing that a stone is gold. If they are godly, however, they are to be numbered among those of the elect who are led into a degree of error, in order that the power of God, without which we cannot see or do anything at all, may be displayed in us. For man’s failure to grasp God’s words does not spring from weakness of understanding, as you would suggest; indeed, there is nothing better adapted for grasping God’s words than weakness of understanding, for it was for the weak and to the weak that Christ came, and to them that He sends His Word. No, the cause is the wickedness of Satan, who is enthroned and reigns over us in our weakness, and who himself resists the Word of God. If Satan did not do so, the whole world could be converted by a single word of God, heard once; there would be no need of more.

### (vi) Of the inconsistency o Erasmus in appealing to antiquity (659-661)

Why need I enlarge? Why should I not end the discussion with this introduction, and bring in my verdict against you on the basis of your own words, according to Christ’s dictum: ‘By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned?’ (Matt. 12.37). You say that Scripture is not clear on the matter on hand. Forthwith you suspend judgment and discuss the pro’s and con’s on each side—and you do nothing more all through your book! That is why you wished to call it a Diatribe *(discussion)* rather than an Apophasis *(denial),* or anything else, because your aim when you wrote it was to gather all the material without the intention of asserting anything. But if Scripture is not clear about it, why were your heroes so stupid and foolhardy in their blindness as to define and affirm ‘free-will’ as if they went on a basis of clear and certain Scripture teaching? I refer, of course, to your *great array of very learned men, unanimously acclaimed by many ages down to the present day, many of whom, over and above their admirable skill in the Holy Scriptures, are recommended by godliness of life, and some of whom bore witness by their blood to the doctrine of Christ which they defended by their writings.* Now, if you say this from your heart, then it is your fixed conviction that ‘free-will’ has had champions who were gifted with wonderful skill in the Holy Scriptures, and who even bore witness to ‘free-will’ by their blood. But if this is so, they surely possessed a Scripture that was clear; else, what becomes of their admirable skill in the Holy Scriptures ? And what inconsiderate foolhardiness it would show, to shed one’s blood over something obscure and uncertain! That befits the devil’s martyrs rather than Christ’s!

Now, do you just face and ponder this question: do you consider that more credit should be given to the judgments of all these scholars, orthodox divines, saints, martyrs, theologians ancient and modern, colleges, councils, bishops and supreme pontiffs, who were convinced that the Scriptures were clear and confirmed them both by their writings and by their blood; or to your own private judgment when you deny that the Scriptures are clear—you who, I dare say, never dropped a tear or uttered a sigh for the doctrine of Christ in your life! If you think they were right, why do you not follow them ? If you think they were wrong, why do you cry them up with such a great fanfare of language, as if you wanted to drown me in the stormy deluge of your eloquence?—a deluge whose force is unloosed rather upon your own head, while my ark rides aloft to safety! In fact, you credit all these great men with a complete lack of sense and sobriety by describing them as experts upon Scripture, who asserted it by pen, and by life, and by death, while yet you maintain that Scripture is obscure and ambiguous! This is just to make them out to be wholly inexpert in their understanding and great fools in their asserting. Not even I, who as a private individual set little store by them, would have paid them so poor a compliment as do you, who stand up in public to sing their praises!

Here, then, I have you (as they say) on the horns of a dilemma.[^12] One of your assertions *must* be false: either your verdict that they were men to be admired for their skill in the sacred writings, and for their life and martyrdom, or else your view that Scripture is not clear. And since you are more ' drawn in the latter direction, towards believing that the Scriptures are not clear (for you harp on this point all through your book), we are forced to conclude ‘that it was to gratify pride, or to flatter, and not with any serious intent, that you spoke of these men as experts upon Scripture and martyrs of Christ; merely in order to throw dust in the eyes of an unlearned public, and to cause Luther trouble by burdening his case with empty expressions of spleen and contempt! But I maintain that in fact *neither* assertion is true; *both* are false. Firstly, I hold that the Scriptures are perfectly clear; secondly, I hold that the persons you mention, so far as they asserted ‘free-will’, were wholly inexpert in the sacred writings; but that they did not assert it by life or death, but only on paper, and that only when their mind was straying.

So I round off this little argument thus: By Scripture, as being obscure, nothing certain ever has been or could be defined concerning ‘free-will’. I say this on your own testimony. By the lives of all men from the beginning of the world, nothing whatever has been disclosed that favours ‘free-will’. That I proved above. And to teach something that is not laid down by a single word within the Scriptures, nor evidenced by a single fact outside the Scriptures, is appropriate for the ‘true tales’ of Lucian, but not for Christian doctrine! Except that Lucian, who seeks only to entertain with the sly humour of his comic narratives, deceives and injures nobody; but our adversaries of your party play the fool over a solemn matter that affects eternal salvation, and thereby ruin countless souls.

Thus I might finish this whole discussion about ‘free-will’, for even the testimony of my opponents makes for me and against themselves; and there is no stronger proof than the confession and testimony of the guilty party against himself! But since Paul instructs us to stop the mouths of vain talkers (cf. Tit. 1.11), let us advance upon the debate proper, handling the subject in the order in which the Diatribe proceeds. We shall *first* confute the arguments which it has brought forward for ‘free-will’; *secondly,* we shall defend our own arguments, which it has attacked; *finally,* we shall do battle against ‘freewill’ for the grace of God.

---

### Notes

[^1]: The section of the Diatribe which Luther here discusses may be quoted at length: 'However, I would like to impress upon the reader that, if I shall appear to be Luther's equal in the matter of testimonies from the Divine Scripture and solid arguments, he should then set before his eyes the very great array of most learned men, acclaimed by many ages down to the present day, many of whom, over and above their admirable skill in the Holy Scriptures, are recommended by godliness of life, and some of whom bore witness with their blood to the doctrine of Christ which they had defended by their writings ... not to mention the authority of many schools, councils, and supreme pontiffs. From the times of the Apostles to the present day, no writer has so far appeared who would sweep away the power of 'freewill" altogether, save only Manichaeus, and John Wycliffe. (The authority of Laurentius Valla, who seems almost to agree with them, does not carry much weight with the theologians.) . . . if the reader sees that the equipage of my argument fights on equal terms with its adversary, then let him ponder whether he thinks that more weight is due to the precedents of so many scholars, saints, martyrs, theologians ancient and modern, schools, councils, bishops and supreme pontiffs, or to the private judgment of one or two individuals. I admit that it is right that the authority of the Divine Scripture alone should prevail above all the judgments of mortal man. But the controversy here does not concern the Scriptures. Each side embraces and does honour to the same Scripture: their conflict concerns the sense of Scripture. ... I am told: "What need is there of an expositor (interprete), when the Scripture is clear?" If it is so clear, why were excellent men blind at this point for so many centuries, and that in a matter of such moment as our opponents would have it thought to be? ... I am told: " What bearing has weight of numbers (multitudo) on the meaning of the Spirit?" I reply: what bearing has lack of numbers (paucitas) ? . . . The Apostles would not have been believed, had not miracles procured belief for their doctrine . . . When the Apostles shook off vipers, healed the sick, and aroused the dead, then at last they were believed; and yet hardly so, so paradoxical was their teaching. How, though our opponents put forward teaching that is generally considered to be almost more paradoxical still, none of them has so far appeared who could even cure a lame horse! Leaving miracles aside, would that certain persons would exhibit the sincerity and simplicity of Apostolic character, which for us slowcoaches (tardiusculis) would do in place of miracles! 1 say this, not specifically against Luther {whom I do not know personally, and whose writings variously (varie) affect me as I read them), but of certain others of whom I have a nearer knowledge. . .
[^2]: sub hastam libenter ibimus.
[^3]: cf. Horace, Epist. I.18, 15 and II. 2, 128-130.
[^4]: Perdidi tempus meum, quia perdite vixi.
[^5]: affeclibus et operibus.
[^6]: Vertumnus was the Etruscan god of the changing seasons.
[^7]: ad Eustochium, ep. 22.19.
[^8]: J. Faber, Malleus in Haeresin Lutheranam (1524).
[^9]: ‘ When asked, by what proof the true interpretation of Scripture may be known, when men (homines) stand on both sides, they reply: “by the judgment of the Spirit." '
[^10]: In his treatise, De Ecclesia, VII (1413).
[^11]: prestigio illusus.
[^12]: cornuto . . . syllogismo·
