# IV. Review of Erasmus' Arguments for 'Free-Will' (W.A. 661–699)

### (i) Of Erasmus' definition of free-will' (661-666)

And, first, we will begin, as we should, from your actual definition. You define ‘free-will’ thus: *‘Moreover, I conceive of “free-will" in this context as a power of the human will by which a man may apply himself to those things that lead to eternal salvation, or turn away from the same.'*

Cautiously, indeed, you here propound a bare definition, but give no account of any of its parts, as others normally do— perhaps because you feared a succession of shipwrecks! I am thus compelled to investigate the several parts myself. The thing defined, if closely examined, is undoubtedly of greater extent than the definition. This is the kind of definition that the Sophists call *vicious[^1]—*that is, one in which the definition fails to cover the thing defined. For I showed above that ‘free-will’ belongs to none but God only. You are no doubt right in assigning to man a will of some sort, but to credit him with a will that is free in the things of God is too much. For all who hear mention of ‘free-will’ take it to mean, in its proper sense, a will that can and does do, God-ward, all that it pleases, restrained by no law and no command; for you would not call a slave, who acts at the beck of his lord, *free.* But in that case how much less are we right to call men or angels *free;* for they live under the complete mastery of God (not to mention sin and death), and cannot continue by their own strength for a moment. Here then, right at the outset, the definition of the term and the definition of the thing are at odds, for the term connotes one thing and what is really in mind is another. It would be more correct to call it ‘vertible-will’ or ‘mutable-will.’ In this way Augustine, and the Sophists after him, diminish the glory and force of the term ‘free’, qualifying it with this limitation, which they call the ‘vertibility’ of ‘freewill’. And it becomes us to speak in the same way, lest we befool men’s hearts with swollen and vainglorious words; as Augustine also thinks. We should speak according to a definite rule, in sober and proper terms; for what is wanted in teaching is simplicity and logical correctness, not the high-flown figures of a rhetorical persuasive.

However, lest we should seem to delight in a war of words, let us allow you for the present this piece of abusage, serious and dangerous though it is: let ‘free-will’ be the same as ‘vertible-will’. And let us also allow Erasmus to make ‘free-will’ to be ‘a power of the *human* will’ (as if the angels had no ‘freewill’ !); seeing that he proposes in this book to treat only of the ‘free-will’ of man. (Otherwise, the definition would be narrower than the thing defined at this point also.)

We come then to the parts of the definition, on which everything hinges. Some of them are clear enough; others shun the light, as if they had a guilty fear of something!—though nothing needs to be stated more clearly and precisely than a definition, for to define obscurely is simply to define nothing at all. The clear parts of the definition are these: ‘a power of the human will’ and ‘by which a man can’; and ‘to eternal salvation’. But the following are complete enigmas:[^2] ‘to apply’; and, ‘to those things that lead’; and ‘turn away’. What shall we divine that ‘apply’ means, and ‘turn away’ ? And what are the ‘things that lead to eternal salvation’? Where do they lurk? I see I am contending with a very Scotus or Heraclitus, and must spend my strength in a twofold task. First, I must find my adversary, by groping and feeling for him in pits and dark corners (a bold and hazardous enterprise); for unless I find him I shall fight in vain with phantoms and beat the air in the dark. Then, if I can bring him to light, I shall have to join battle with him on equal terms when I am already worn out with hunting for him. I suppose, then, that this ‘power of the human will’ means a power, or faculty, or disposition, or aptitude to will or not to will, to choose or reject, to approve or disapprove, and to perform all the other actions of the will. Now, what it means for this same power to ‘apply itself’ or to ‘turn away’ I do not see, unless this refers to the actual willing or not willing, choosing or rejecting, approving or disapproving—that is, the very action of the will itself. So we must suppose that this power is something that comes between the will and its action, something by which the will itself elicits the act of willing or not willing, and by means of which the action of willing or not willing is elicited. Nothing else is imaginable or conceivable. If I mistake the meaning here, blame the author who gave the definition, not me who examine it; for it is rightly said in the legal world that the words of one who speaks obscurely when he could have spoken more plainly should be interpreted against himself. And here I do not want to hear anything about my friends the Moderns[^3] and their subtleties; in the interests of teaching and understanding, we ought to state matters bluntly.[^4]

As for those things ‘that lead to eternal salvation’, I suppose they are the words and works of God, which are offered to the human will so that it may apply itself to them or turn away from them. I take the ‘words of God’ to include both the law and the gospel: the law requires works, the gospel faith. There is nothing else that leads to the grace of God, or eternal salvation, but the word and work of God—grace, or the Spirit, being that very life to which the word and work of God lead us.

But this life, or salvation, belongs to the eternal order and is incomprehensible to human capacity, as Paul shows from Isaiah in 1 Cor. 2: ‘Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him’ (1 Cor. 2.9; Isa. 64.4). For it also is enumerated among the principal articles of our faith, when we say: ‘and the life everlasting.’ Paul tells us what ‘free-will’ avails with respect to this article in 1 Cor. 2: ‘God’ (he says) ‘hath revealed (these things) unto us by his Spirit’ (v. 10)—which means that, unless the Spirit revealed them, no man’s heart would know anything about the matter; so impossible is it that man could ever apply himself to it or seek after it. Look at experience; see what the most distinguished minds among the nations have thought of the future life and the resurrection. Is it not a fact that the more distinguished their minds were, the more ridiculous the resurrection and eternal life was to them ? Or were not those philosophers and Greeks at Athens, who called Paul a ‘babbler’ and a ‘setter forth of strange gods’ when he taught these things (Acts 17.18), men of mind? Porcius Festus in Acts 24 (26.24) cried out that Paul was mad because of his preaching of eternal life. What of Pliny’s yapping about these matters in his seventh book ? What of Lucian, that great wit? Were these stupid men? To this day, it is true of most men that the greater their wit and learning, the more they deride this article, and that openly, thinking it a fable. For no man on earth, unless imbued with the Holy Ghost, ever in his heart knows of, or believes in, or longs for, eternal salvation, even if he harps upon it by tongue and pen. And may you and I be free from this leaven, dear Erasmus; so rare is a heart that believes in this article! Have I, now, the sense of this definition?

Erasmus informs us, then, that ‘free-will’ is a power of the human will which can of itself will and not will the word and work of God, by which it is to be led to those things that exceed its grasp and comprehension. If it can will and not will, it can also love and hate; and if it can love and hate, it can in measure keep the law and believe the gospel. For, if you can will and not will, it cannot be that you are not able by that will of yours to do some part of a work, even though another should prevent your being able to complete it. Now, since death, the cross, and all the evils of the world, are numbered among the works of God that lead to salvation, the human will will thus be able to will its own death and perdition. Yes, it can will all things when it can will the contents of the word and work of God! What can be anywhere below, above, within or without the word and work of God, except God Himself? But what is here left to grace and the Holy Ghost? This is plainly to ascribe divinity to ‘free-will’! For to will the law and the gospel, not to will sin, and to will death, is possible to divine power alone, as Paul says in more places than one.

Which means that nobody since the Pelagians has written of ‘free-will’ more correctly than Erasmus! For I said above that ‘free-will’ is a divine term, and signifies a divine power. But no one to date, except the Pelagians, has ever assigned to it such power. The Sophists, whatever their views, certainly do not say anything like this! Why, Erasmus far outdoes the very Pelagians; for they ascribe this divinity to the whole of ‘freewill’, while Erasmus ascribes it to half only! The Pelagians posit two parts of ‘free-will’, a power of discernment and a power of choice, attributing the one to the reason and the other to the will; and the Sophists do the same. But Erasmus sets aside the power of discernment and exalts the power of choice alone. Thus he makes a lame ‘half-free-will’ into a God! What do you think he would have done had he set out to describe the whole of ‘free-will’ ?

Not content with this, he outstrips the philosophers too. For it has never yet been settled among them whether a thing can move itself; on this point the Platonists and the Peripatetics disagree throughout the whole body of philosophy. But according to Erasmus ‘free-will’ not only moves itself by its own power, but ‘applies itself’ to the things that are eternal—that is, incomprehensible to itself! Here is a completely new and unheard-of person—a man whose definition of ‘free-will’ leaves philosophers, Pelagians, Sophists and all far and away behind! Nor does this satisfy him; he does not spare himself, but disagrees and crosses swords with himself more than with all the rest! For earlier on he had said that ‘the human will is wholly ineffective without grace’ (did he say it for a joke ?); but here, when he gives a serious definition, he says that ‘the human will has power by which it can effectively apply itself to those things that belong to eternal salvation’—that is, things that are incomparably beyond that power! So that at this point Erasmus outdoes even himself!

Do you see, my good Erasmus, that by this definition you betray (unwittingly, I think) that you know nothing at all of these matters, or at any rate that you write of them in a thoughtless, off-hand way, knowing neither what you say nor whereof you affirm? As I said above, you say less about, and assign more to, ‘free-will’ than all the rest; for you fail to give a complete account of ‘free-will’, and yet you ascribe to it all things. The Sophists, or, at any rate, their sire, Peter Lombard, give us a much more tolerable view. They say: “ ‘free-will’ is a faculty of discerning, and then of choosing, good, if grace is with it, but evil only, if grace be wanting.” Lombard clearly agrees with Augustine that “ ‘free-will’ of its own power has no power but to fall, nor avails but to sin.”[^5]Accordingly, in his second book *Against Julian* (8.23) Augustine calls it a *slave* will rather than *a free* will.[^6] But you make the power of‘free-will’ to be equal in both directions: by its own power, without grace, it can (you tell us) both apply itself to good and turn itself from evil. You do not realise what a mighty power you are ascribing to it by the pronoun ‘itself,’ or ‘its own self,’ when you say: *‘can* apply *itself’·,* for you completely exclude the Holy Spirit and all His power as if superfluous and unnecessary. Your definition, therefore, ought to be condemned even by the Sophists; were they not in the blindness of their hatred so mad against me, they would fume rather against your book. But now, because you are attacking Luther, all that you say is holy and catholic, even though you speak against yourself and them! —so great is the patience of holy men!

Not that I say this because I approve of the Sophists’ view of‘free-will’, but because I think it more tolerable than that of Erasmus; for they approach nearer to the truth than he. Though they do not say, as I do, that ‘free-will’ is nothing at all, yet since they say that it can do nothing of itself without grace, (especially the Master of the Sentences[^7]) they are at odds with Erasmus; indeed, they seem to be at odds with themselves, caught in the toils of a merely verbal debate, and more desirous of argument than of truth—-just as Sophists should be! Suppose a Sophist of the best type were given me, with whom I could talk these things over privately in informal discussion, I should ask for his candid and unbiassed judgment like this: “If anyone should tell you that a thing was *free,* which of its own power could go only one way, that is, the bad way—it could indeed go the other way, that is, the good way, but not by its own power, only with the help of another—could you refrain from laughing, my friend?” For on these grounds I shall easily establish that a stone or a log has ‘free-will’, because it can go up and down; though by its own power it can only go down, and can go up only with the help of another! And, as I said above, we shall end by overturning all usage of words and language and saying: ‘All men are no man, and all things are nothing!’— referring one term to the thing as it is in itself, and the other to something extraneous that might come upon it or happen to it! It is in this way that, after long argument, the Sophists finally make ‘free-will’ free by accident,[^8] in that it could at some point be set free by another. But we are inquiring about the thing as it is in itself, and the reality of ‘free-will’. And if this is the question that is to be settled, nothing is left us but an empty term, ‘free-will’—whether they will or no!

The Sophists are also defective in that they assign to ‘freewill’ the power of discerning good from evil. They leave no room for regeneration and the renewing of the Spirit, but devise an extraneous ‘assistance’ which comes to ‘free-will’ as from without; of which more later. For the moment, let us look at the arguments that are offered to inflate this empty little term.

### (ii) Ecclus. 15.14-17: an inconclusive testimony (666-667)

First comes the passage from Ecclus. 15 (vv. 14-17): ‘God from the beginning made man, and left him in the hand of his own counsel. He added also his commandments and his precepts, saying, If thou art willing to keep my commandments, and to keep continually the faith that pleaseth me, they shall preserve thee. He hath set before thee fire and water; and upon which thou wilt, stretch forth thine hand. Before man is life and death; and whichever pleaseth him shall be given unto him.’

Though I might with justice repudiate this book, yet for the present I receive it, so as not to lose time by entangling myself in a dispute about books received into the Jewish canon. You are somewhat biting and derisive yourself about that canon, when you compare the Proverbs of Solomon and the Love-song (as with a sneering innuendo you term it) to the two books of Esdras and Judith, and the History of Susanna and of the Dragon, and the book of Esther (though they have this last in their canon; in my opinion, however, it is less worthy to be held canonical than any of these). I would shortly reply in your own words: ‘The Scripture is in this place obscure and ambiguous’; therefore, it proves nothing for sure. And since my part is that of denial, I demand that you produce a passage that declares in plain words what ‘free-will’ is, and what it can do. It will take you all eternity to do it.[^9] In fact, you squander many fine words in an attempt to escape this necessity; you tip-toe along, citing your list of opinions about ‘free-will’—almost making Pelagius into an Evangelical! Then you invent a fourfold grace, so that you may ascribe a sort of faith and charity even to the philosophers; and with it a threefold law, of nature, of works and of faith, so that you may roundly assert that the precepts of the philosophers agree with the precepts of the gospel; and then you take Psalm 4 (v. 6), ‘The light of thy countenance is sealed upon us, O Lord,’ which refers to the knowledge of the very countenance of God—that is to faith— and apply it to blinded reason! All this laid together compels a Christian to suspect that you are mocking and deriding the doctrines and religion of Christian people; for to ascribe such great ignorance to one who has surveyed all my writings as you have, and stored them up in memory with so much care, I find very difficult. But I am content to drop the hint; I will keep off that subject for the moment, till a more suitable occasion offers. Yet I beg you, my good Erasmus, not to tempt me so, like one of those who say: ‘Who sees us?’ (cf. Ps. 64.5?) It is not safe, with so weighty an issue at stake, to be perpetually trifling in every company with youi verbal sleight-of-hand.[^10]But back to the point.

### (iii) Of Erasmus’ distinction of three views about free-will’ (667-671)

Out of one view about ‘free-will’ you devise three! The first, that of those who deny that man can will good without special grace, neither start, nor make progress, nor finish, etc. seems to you *‘severe, but probable enough’.* You approve of it because it leaves man effort and endeavour, but does not leave him anything that he may ascribe to his own strength. The second, that of those who contend that ‘free-will’ avails for nothing but sinning, and that grace alone works good in us, etc., seems to you *‘more severe’;* and the third, that of those who say that ‘free-will’ is an empty term, and God works in us both good and evil, and all that comes to pass is of mere necessity, seems to you *‘most severe'*. It is against these two last that you profess to be writing.

Do you know what you are saying, my dear Erasmus? You represent here three opinions, as if of three parties, simply because you fail to realise that it is the same thing in each case, stated by us same spokesmen of the selfsame party, but in different ways and different words. Let me instruct you, and show you the sleepy stupidity of your judgment.

How, I ask, does that definition of ‘free-will’ which you gave above square with this first view, which is *‘probable enough’?* You said that ‘free-will’ is a power of the human will by which a man can apply himself to good; but here you say, and approve of its being said, that man without grace cannot will good. The definition affirms what the statement parallel to it denies! So there is found in your ‘free-will’ at the same moment a *yes* and a *no,* and in the same breath you say that we are both right and wrong, and that you yourself are both right and wrong, over one and the same doctrine and article! Do you think that to apply itself to what bears on eternal salvation (as your definition says that ‘free-will’ does) is not *good?* If there were enough good in ‘free-will’ for it to apply itself to good, it would have no need of grace! So the ‘free-will’ you define is one thing, and the ‘free-will’ you defend is another. Erasmus now has two ‘free-wills’, more than anyone else, and they are at loggerheads with each other!

But, leaving aside the ‘free-will’ which the definition invented, let us consider the opposite one which this view posits. You grant that without special grace man cannot will good (for we are not now discussing what God’s grace can do, but what man can do without it); you grant, then, that ‘free-will’ cannot will good; and this is just to grant that it can *not* apply itself to what bears on eternal salvation—which was the burden of your definition! Furthermore: a little earlier, you say that *the human will after sin is so depraved that it has lost its freedom and is forced to serve sin, and cannot recall itself to a better state!* And if I am not mistaken, you make the Pelagians to have been of this mind. Now here, I think, no way of escape is open to Proteus; he is caught and held fast by his own plain words, namely, that the will has lost its liberty and is tied and bound in slavery to sin. O excellently ‘free’ will! which has lost its freedom and is declared by Erasmus himself to be the slave of sin! Yet when Luther said the same, *‘nothing so absurd was ever heard of!' ‘nothing could be more useless than that this paradox should be broadcast!’—*and it was your bounden duty to write Diatribes against him!

Perhaps nobody will believe me when I say that Erasmus says these things. Let doubters read the Diatribe at this point; they will be surprised! Not that I am particularly surprised. A man who does not treat this question seriously and has no interest in the issue, whose mind is not on it and who finds it a boring and a chilling and a distasteful business, cannot help uttering absurdities and follies and contradictions all along the line; he argues his case like a man drunk or asleep, blurting out between snores ‘Yes!’ ‘No!’ as different voices sound upon his ears! This is why rhetoricians require passion in one who pleads a case. Much more does theology require passion, to make a man vigorous, and keen, and earnest, and prudent, and energetic!

If, now, ‘free-will’ without grace has lost its freedom, is forced to serve sin, and cannot will good, I should like to know what that effort and endeavour amount to which the first view, the ‘probable’ one, leaves it. It cannot be a good effort or endeavour, for ‘free-will’ cannot will good, as the view states and you grant. It remains, then, that it must be an evil effort and endeavour, which has lost its freedom and is forced to serve sin. Now what does *that* mean ? Does this view leave man effort and endeavour, without leaving him anything that he may ascribe to his own strength ? Who can form any conception of that ? If effort and endeavour are left to the strength of ‘freewill’, why should they not be ascribed to the same? If they should not be ascribed to it, how are they left to it? Are then the effort and endeavour that go before grace left, not to ‘freewill’, but to that very grace that comes after, so that they are at the same time left and not left to one and the same ‘free-will’ ? If these positions are not paradoxes, or freaks, rather, then what *are* freaks ?

But maybe this is the dream of the Diatribe, that between these two things, ‘ability to will good’ and ‘inability to will good’, there may be a middle term, that is, ‘willing’ in the abstract,[^11] without respect to good and evil; so that, by a logical finesse, we may now steer clear of the rocks and say that there is in man’s will a certain *willing·,* without grace it cannot indeed will good, but it does not forthwith will only evil; it is just *willing,* pure and simple, and may be directed either upwards by grace towards good, or downwards by sin towards evil. But what then becomes of your statement that *it has lost its freedom and is forced to serve sin* ? Where then is that effort and endeavour that you left it ? Where is its power to apply itself to that which pertains to eternal salvation ? For that power of applying itself to salvation cannot be just *willing,* unless salvation itself is said to be *nothing'.* Nor can that effort and endeavour be just *willing·,* for effort must strive and aim for something (such as, good), and cannot be active or inactive with *nothing* as its end in view! In a word, wherever the Diatribe turns it cannot keep clear of inconsistencies and contradictions, nor avoid making that very ‘free-will’ which it defends as much a prisoner as it is itself. In trying to free the will it gets so entangled that it ends up bound, as ‘free-will’ is, in bonds indissoluble!

Moreover, it is a mere logical fancy that there is in man a middle term, *willing* as such; nor can those who assert it prove it. The notion sprang from ignorance of things and preoccupation with words. As though things always corresponded in fact ' to the verbal analysis of them! (The Sophists make endless errors over this.) The truth is rather as Christ puts it: ‘He that is not with me is against me’ (Matt. 12.30). He does not say: he that is not with Me is not against Me either, but is in an intermediate position! For if God is in us, Satan is out of us, and then it is present with us to will only good. But if God is not in us, Satan is, and then it is present with us to will only evil. Neither God nor Satan permits there to be in us mere *willing* in the abstract; but, as you rightly said, we have lost our freedom and are forced to serve sin—that is, we *will* sin and evil, we *speak* sin and evil, we *do* sin and evil.

See where truth, invincible and all-powerful, has driven the witless Diatribe! It has so made foolish its wisdom that when it intends to speak against me it is forced to speak for me against itself! This is just how ‘free-will’ does a good deed: in the very act of going against evil, it goes against good, and does evil more than ever! So that the Diatribe is in speech just what ‘free-will’ is in action! And the entire Diatribe is nothing but a noble act of ‘free-will’ condemning itself in its own defence, and defending itself by its own condemnation: that is, being doubly stupid while it wishes to look wise!

This, then, is what the first view comes to when compared with itself: it says that man cannot will anything good, but leaves him effort, which is not, however, his own!

Now let us compare this view with the two remaining. The second is the *‘more severe’* one, which holds that ‘free-will’ avails for nothing but sin. This is certainly Augustine’s opinion, which he expresses in many places, particularly in his book *Of the Spirit and the Letter,* in chapter four or five, if I am not mistaken *(De Spiritu et Littera,* 3.5), where he uses those very words. The third is the *‘most severe’* view, that of Wycliffe and Luther: that ‘free-will’ is an empty term, and that everything we do is done of pure necessity. With these two views, we are told, the Diatribe is in conflict.

Here let me say this: perhaps I am not good enough at Latin or German to have succeeded in explaining the point; but I call God witness that by the words of the last two views I meant to say nothing, and wished nothing to be understood, but what is stated in the first view; nor do I think that Augustine intended anything but this, nor do I understand any other meaning from his words than what the first view affirms; so that the three views retailed by the Diatribe are to my mind nothing but the one view which I hold. For once it is granted and settled that ‘free-will’ has lost its freedom, and is bound in the service of sin, and can will no good, I can gather nothing from these words but that ‘free-will’ is an empty term whose reality is lost. A lost freedom, to my way of speaking, is no freedom at all, and to give the name of freedom to something that has no freedom is to apply to it a term that is empty of meaning. If I am wrong here, let him who can put me right. If this is obscure or ambiguous, let him who can clarify and confirm it. I for one cannot call lost health, health; and if I were to credit an invalid with health I should think I was applying to him just an empty term.

Away with such freaks of language! Who can endure the abuse of speech involved in our saying that man has ‘free-will’ while at the same time we maintain that he has lost his freedom, and is bound in the service of sin, and can will no good? These things are contrary to common sense, and utterly overthrow our use of language. The Diatribe is rather blameworthy for the sleepy way it burbles out its own words without regard to other men’s. It does not, I repeat, weigh up what it means, and how far-reaching it is, to say that man has lost his freedom, and is forced to serve sin, and can will no good. Were it awake and on the look-out, it would see clearly that there is only one sentiment contained in the three views which it makes to be contrary and opposite. For if a man has lost his freedom, and is forced to serve sin, and cannot will good, what conclusion can more justly be drawn concerning him, than that he sins and wills evil *necessarily?* Even the Sophists by their syllogisms would conclude as much. Whereas the Diatribe, unhappily enough, declares war on the last two views and approves the first, which is precisely the same as the other two; thus once more (as usual) condemning itself and approving my sentiments at one and the same moment.

### (iv) Ecclus. 15.14-17 (contd.): man, as subject to the will of God, is not free (671-672)

Now let us come to that passage in Ecclesiasticus, and compare with it that first view, the *‘probable’* one! The view states that ‘free-will’ cannot will good. The passage in Ecclesiasticus is cited to prove that ‘free-will’ is something and can do something. So the view which should be proved by Ecclesiasticus asserts one thing, and Ecclesiasticus is quoted to prove another! —as if one who wished to prove that Christ was Messiah should quote a passage which proves that Pilate was governor of Syria, or something equally inappropriate! This is how ‘free-will’ is proved here (not to advert to my earlier point, that no clear and definite statement or proof is given of what ‘freewill’ is and what it can do). It is worth while to look through the whole passage. First it says: ‘God made man at the beginning.’ Here it speaks of man’s creation; it says nothing as yet of either ‘free-will’ or commandments. Then it goes on: ‘and left him in the hand of his own counsel.’ What have we here? Is this where ‘free-will’ is erected? But there is no mention here of commandments, for the performance of which ‘free-will’ is required; we read nothing of this in the reference to man’s creation. If anything is to be understood by ‘the hand of his own counsel’, what should rather be understood is the fact, recorded in Gen. 1 and 2, that man was made lord of all things so that he might freely rule them, as Moses says: ‘Let us make man to have dominion over the fishes of the sea’ (cf. Gen. 1.26). Nothing else can be evinced from the words. For there man certainly could act according to his own will, all these things having been put under his control. Furthermore, it calls this ‘the counsel of man’, as being a different thing from the counsel of God.

After this, having said that man was thus made and left in the hand of his own counsel, it proceeds: ‘He added also his commandments and his precepts.’ Added them to what? Obviously to that counsel and will of man, over and above the constitution of man’s dominion over other things. By these commandments He took from man his dominion over one part of the created order (that is, the tree of knowledge of good and evil), and willed rather that he should *not* be free. Having added the commandments, the text then comes to the will of man towards God and the things of God. ‘If thou art willing to keep the commandments, they shall preserve thee,’ etc.

With the words, then, ‘If thou art willing,’ the discussion of ‘free-will’ begins. So we learn from Ecclesiasticus that man falls under two kingdoms. In the one, he is led by his own will and counsel, not by any precepts and commandments of God; that is, in the realm of things below him. Here he reigns and is lord, as being left in the hand of his own counsel. Not that God leaves him alone in the sense that He does not co-operate with him in all things; but in the sense that He has granted him a free use of things at his own will, and not hedged him in with any laws or commands. You could say by way of parallel that the gospel has left us in the hand of our own counsel, to use and have dominion over things as we will; whereas Moses and the Pope did not leave us to that counsel, but constrained us by laws and subjected us rather to their will. In the other kingdom, however, man is not left in the hand of his own counsel, but is directed and led by the will and counsel of God. As in his own kingdom he is led by his own will, and not by the precepts of another, so in the kingdom of God he is led by the precepts of another, and not by his own will. This is what Ecclesiasticus means when he says: ‘He added also his commandments and his precepts, saying, If thou art willing,’ etc.

If, now, this is sufficiently plain, I have demonstrated that this passage of Ecclesiasticus does not make for ‘free-will’, but against it, inasmuch as it subjects man to the precepts and will of God, and takes his ‘free-will’ from him. If it is not sufficiently plain, I have at least ensured that this passage cannot count in favour of‘free-will’, inasmuch as it can be understood in a sense different from that of our opponents, that is, in my sense already stated, which is not absurd, but is extremely sound, and in harmony with the whole Scripture; whereas their sense goes against the whole Scripture, and is derived from this one passage only, against the tenor of the whole Scripture. I stand secure upon the good sense, and upon my denial of ‘free-will’, until they shall confirm their strained and forced affirmation of it!

So when Ecclesiasticus says, ‘If thou art willing to keep the commandments, and to keep the faith that pleaseth me, they shall preserve thee,’ I fail to see how ‘free-will’ can be proved from his words. ‘If thou art willing’ is a verb in the subjunctive mood, which asserts nothing. As the logicians say, a conditional statement asserts nothing indicatively—such statements as, ‘if the devil be God, he is deservedly worshipped’; or, ‘if an ass flies, an ass has wings’; or, ‘if there be “free-will”, grace is nothing’. And if Ecclesiasticus had wished to assert ‘free-will’, he ought to have spoken thus: ‘man is able to keep God’s commandments’; or, ‘man has power to keep the commandments’.

### (v) That a command does not always imply ability to fulfil it (673-674)

Here the Diatribe will retort: *‘Ecclesiasticus, by saying “if thou art willing to keep”, indicates that there is a will in man to keep* or not to keep; otherwise, what is the sense of saying to him who has no will, “if thou wilt” ? Is it not ridiculous to say to a blind man: “if thou art willing to see, thou wilt find a treasure” ? or to a deaf man: “if thou art willing to hear, I will tell thee a good story” ? That would be mocking their misery.’

I reply: These are arguments of human reason, which is wont to pour out wisdom of this sort. Wherefore, I now have to dispute, not with Ecclesiasticus, but with human reason, concerning an inference; for reason, by her inferences and syllogisms, explains and pulls the Scriptures of God whichever way she likes. I shall enter this dispute readily and with confidence, for I know that all her gabblings are stupid and absurd, and especially so when she begins to make a show of her wisdom in holy things.

First then: if I ask how it is proved that the existence of ‘free-will’ in man is indicated and implied wherever the phrases ‘if thou art willing’, ‘if thou shalt do’, ‘if thou shalt hear’, are used, she will say, ‘Because the nature of words and use of language among men seem to require it.’ Therefore, she bases her judgment of things and words that are of God upon the customs and concerns of men; and what is more perverse than that, when the former are heavenly and the latter earthly ? Thus in her stupidity she betrays herself as thinking of God only as of man.

But what if I prove that the nature of words and use of language, even among men, is not always such as to make it an act of mockery to say to the impotent, ‘if thou art willing’, ‘if thou shalt do’, ‘if thou shalt hear’? How often do parents thus play with their children, bidding them come to them, or do this or that, only in order that it may appear how impotent they are, and that they may be compelled to call for the help of the parent’s hand? How often does a faithful physician tell an obstinate patient to do or stop doing things that are impossible or injurious to him, so as to bring him by experience of himself to a knowledge of his disease or weakness, to which he cannot lead him by any other course ? And what is more common and widespread than to use insulting and provoking language when we would show our enemies or friends what they can and cannot do? I merely mention these things to show reason how stupid she is to tack her inferences on to the Scriptures, and how blind she is not to see that they do not always hold good even in respect of the words and dealings of men. Let her see a thing occur once, and she jumps precipitately to the conclusion that it occurs as a general rule in all the statements of both God and men—generalising from a particular case, which is the way of her wisdom.

If, now, God, as a Father, deals with us as with His sons, with a view to showing us the impotence of which we are ignorant; or as a faithful physician, with a view to making known to us our disease; or if, to taunt His enemies, who proudly resist His counsel and the laws He has set forth (by which He achieves this end most effectively), He should say: ‘do’, ‘hear’, ‘keep’, or: ‘if thou shalt hear’, ‘if thou art willing’, ‘if thou shalt do’; can it be fairly concluded from this that therefore we can do these things freely, or else God is mocking us? Why should not this conclusion follow rather: therefore, God is trying us, that by His law He may bring us to a knowledge of our impotence, if we are His friends ? or else, He is really and deservedly taunting and mocking us, if we are His proud enemies ? For this, as Paul teaches, is the intent of divine legislation (cf. Rom. 3.20, 5.20; Gal. 3.19, 24). Human nature is blind, so that it does not know its own strength—or, rather, sickness; moreover, being proud, it thinks it knows and can do everything. God can cure this pride and ignorance by no readier remedy than the publication of His law. We shall say more of this in its proper place. Let it suffice here to have touched upon it so as to refute this inference of a carnal and stupid wisdom: ‘ “if thou art willing”; therefore, thou canst will freely.’ The Diatribe dreams that man is whole and sound (as to human view, in his own sphere, he is); hence it argues from the phrases: ‘if thou art willing’, ‘if thou shalt do’, ‘If thou shalt hear’, that man is being mocked, unless his will is free. But Scripture describes man as corrupted and led captive, and, furthermore, as proudly disdaining to notice, and failing to recognise, his own corruption and captivity; therefore, it uses these phrases to goad and rouse him, that he may know by sure experience how unable he is to do any of these things.

### (vi) That Erasmus’ argument, if valid, would establish plenary ability (674-676)

Now I shall attack the Diatribe directly. If you really think, O mistress Reason, that your inferences hold good (‘“if thou art willing”; therefore, thou freely canst’), why do you not follow them yourself? For you say in the words of that ‘probable view’ that ‘free-will’ cannot will any good. By what consequence will *that* come out of the passage under discussion (‘if thou art willing to keep . . .’), from which you say it follows that man can will and not will freely? Do bitter and sweet come out of the same spring ? Do you not mock man more yourself here, when you say that he can *keep* what he can neither will nor desire ? So, then, you yourself do not think in your heart that ‘ “if thou art willing”; therefore, thou freely canst’ is a good inference, even though you contend so zealously for it—or else, it is not from your heart that you call the view which maintains man’s inability to will good, ‘probable’! Reason is thus so entrapped in the inferences and words of her own wisdom, that she does not know what she is saying or talking about. It is, however, entirely appropriate that ‘free-will’ should be defended with the sort of arguments that mutually devour and destroy each other; just as the Midianites destroyed each other by mutual massacre when they fought against Gideon and the people of God (Judges 7.22).

Indeed, I shall expostulate more fully with the wisdom of the Diatribe. Ecclesiasticus does not say: ‘if thou shalt have a desire and endeavour to keep, which is not to be ascribed to your own strength’ (which is the meaning you gather from his words); what he says is this: ‘if thou wilt *keep* the commandments, they shall preserve thee.’ Now, if I want to draw inferences in the style of your wisdom, I shall draw them thus: ‘therefore, man is able to keep the commandments!’ Thus, I shall not make a tiny little effort, or a tiny spark of endeavour, to be left in man, but I shall ascribe to him entire, plenary and abundant power to keep the commandments. Otherwise, Ecclesiasticus would be mocking men’s misery, commanding them to ‘keep’ when he knows that they cannot ‘keep’! It would not be enough for effort and endeavour to be present with man, nor could Ecclesiasticus escape suspicion of mockery, unless he meant that there is in man power to ‘keep’!

Let us suppose that the effort and endeavour of ‘free-will’ really exist. What shall we say to those (the Pelagians, I mean) who, on the basis of this passage, denied grace altogether, and ascribed everything to ‘free-will’ ? If the Diatribe’s inference stands good, the Pelagians have clearly won the day for Ecclesiasticus’ words speak, not of ‘desiring’ or ‘endeavouring’, but of‘keeping.’ If you deny the Pelagians their inference with respect to ‘keeping’, they in reply will much more rightly deny .your inference with respect to ‘endeavouring’. If you take from .them the whole of ‘free-will’, they will take from you your remaining particle of it; for you cannot assert of a part what you deny to the whole. So whatever you say against the Pelagians, who on the basis of this passage ascribe everything to ‘free-will’, that I also will say, much more strongly, against the tiny little effort of your ‘free-will’! And the Pelagians will agree with us to this extent, that, if their view cannot be proved from (this passage, much less can any other be proved from it, since, if the argument is to be conducted by inferences, Ecclesiasticus makes for the Pelagians most strongly of all; for he speaks in .plain terms of a total ‘keeping’ ‘If thou wilt *keep* the commandments.’ Yes, and he speaks of faith: ‘If thou wilt keep the faith’ so that, by the same inference, it ought to be in our power to keep the faith too. But that, as Paul says, is a special and rare gift of God (cf. Eph. 2.8).

In a word: seeing that so many divergent and contrary Opinions may be counted that favour ‘free-will’, and none of them omits to grasp at this passage of Ecclesiasticus in its own support, they are bound to hold that Ecclesiasticus diverges from and contradicts themselves in this one selfsame utterance. So they can prove nothing from him; though, if your inference is allowed, it makes in favour of the Pelagians alone, and against all others. Hence it also makes against the Diatribe, which at this point is stabbed with its own sword!

I affirm, as I said at first, that this passage of Ecclesiasticus favours none of those who assert ‘free-will’, but fights against them all. The inference: ‘ “If thou art willing”; therefore, thou canst,’ is not admissible; it should be understood that by this statement, and by those like it, man is admonished of his own impotence, which he, in his ignorance and pride, would not recognise or be aware of without these Divine admonitions. Here I speak, not of the first man only, but of every man; though it does not much matter whether you understand what is said of the first man, or of any other man. For although the first man was not impotent, inasmuch as grace assisted him, yet God by this commandment shows him clearly enough how impotent he would be without grace. And if he, who had the Spirit, could not with his new will will a good newly proposed (that is, obedience), because the Spirit did not add that to him, what can we, without the Spirit, do about the good that we have lost? By the dreadful example of that first man, it was shown us, with a view to breaking down our pride, what our ‘free-will’ can do if it is left to itself, and is not continually moved and increased more and more by the Spirit of God. That first man could do nothing to secure an increase of the Spirit Whose first-fruits he had, but fell from these first-fruits of the Spirit; what then could we, who are fallen, do to secure the first-fruits of the Spirit that have been taken from us? Especially when Satan, who cast Adam down by temptation alone, at a time when he was not yet Adam’s ruler, now reigns in us with complete power over us! No stronger argument could be brought against ‘free-will’ than this passage of Ecclesiasticus, taken in conjunction with the fall of Adam. But there is no room for that now; maybe an opportunity will offer elsewhere. Meanwhile, it is enough to have shown that, in this passage, which the advocates of ‘free-will’ regard as their principal authority, Ecclesiasticus says nothing at all in favour of ‘free-will’, and that this passage and others like it (‘if thou art willing’, ‘if thou hear’, ‘if thou do’) declare, not man’s *ability,* but his *duty.*

### (vii) Gen. 4.7: obligation does not imply ability (676)

Another passage is cited by our Diatribe from Gen. 4, where the Lord says to Cain: ‘Under thee shall be the desire of sin, and thou shalt rule over it’ (v. 7). *‘Here it is shown,’* says the Diatribe, *‘that the motions of the mind to evil can be overcome, and that they do not bring with them a necessity of sinning.’*

These words, ‘the motions of the mind to evil can be overcome,’ are ambiguous; but from the force of the sentiment, the inference drawn, and the subject-matter, they must mean that it is in the power of ‘free-will’ to overcome its motions to evil, and that these motions do not bring upon it any necessity to sin. Here again, what is excluded from that which is ascribed to ‘free-will’ ? What need is there of the Spirit, or Christ, or God, if ‘free-will’ can overcome the motions of the mind to evil? Again, where is that ‘probable view’ which says that ‘free-will’ cannot even will good? Victory over evil is here ascribed to that which neither wills nor desires good! The thoughtlessness of our friend the Diatribe is exceedingly excessive!

Here is the matter in a nutshell: As 1 said, by statements of this sort, man is shown, not what he can do, but what he ought to do. Cain is therefore told that he ought to rule over his sin, and keep its desires under his control. But this he neither did nor could do, for the rule of another, Satan, already bore heavily upon him. It is well known that the Hebrews often use the future indicative for the imperative, as in Exod. 20: *‘Thou shalt* have none other gods but me,’ *‘Thou shalt* not kill,’ *‘Thou shalt* not commit adultery’ (vv. 3, 13-14); and there are countless such cases. If these words were taken indicatively, as they stand, they would be promises of God; and, since He cannot lie, the result would be that no man would sin; and then it would be needless to give men commandments! So our translator would have rendered this passage more correctly as follows: ‘Let its desire be under thee, and rule thou over it.’ Similarly, it ought to be said concerning the woman: ‘Be thou under thy husband, and let him rule over thee’ (Gen. 3.16). That the words were not spoken to Cain in an indicative sense is proved by the fact that then they would have been a Divine promise; but they were not a promise, for the opposite of them ensued in Cain’s conduct.

### (viii) Deut. 30. ig, etc.: the law is designed to give knowledge of sin (676-680)

The third passage is from Moses: Ί have set before thy face life and death; choose what is good,’ etc. (Deut. 30.19). *‘What could be more clearly stated?’* says the Diatribe; *‘it leaves man* *freedom of choice.’* I reply: What could be more clear than that at this point you are blind ? Where, pray, does it leave freedom of choice ? In its use of the word ‘choose’ ? Does it, then, come to pass that, as soon as Moses says ‘choose’, they do choose ? In that case, there is once more no need of the Spirit. Since you so often repeat and stress the same things, it will be legitimate for me too to reiterate the same points the more often. If freedom of choice remains to us, why did the ‘probable view’ say that ‘free-will’ cannot will good ? Can it choose without willing, or against its will ?

But listen to the Diatribe’s analogy: *‘It would be ridiculous to say to a man standing where two roads met: “You see two roads; go by which you will,” when only one of them was open.’* Here is the very thing that I said of the arguments of human reason: reason thinks that man is mocked by an impossible commandment, whereas I maintain that by this means man is admonished and awakened to see his own impotence. It is true that we stand where two roads meet, and only one of them is open—indeed, neither is open; and the law shows us how impossible is the one, that leading to good, unless God bestows His Spirit, and how broad and easy is the other, if God lets us go that way. Now, it would not be ridiculous but a serious and necessary matter, to say to a man standing where two roads met: ‘go by which you will,’ if he in spite of weakness wanted to think himself strong, or maintained that neither way was closed. So the words of the law are spoken, not to assert the power of the will, but to illuminate the blindness of reason, so that it may see that its own light is nothing, and the power of the will is nothing. ‘By the law is knowledge of sin,’ says Paul (Rom. 3.20). He does not say: *abolition,* or *avoidance,* of sin. The entire design and power of the law is just to give knowledge, and that of nothing but of sin; not to display or confer any power. This knowledge is not power, nor does it bring power; but it teaches and displays that there is here no power, and great weakness. What can ‘knowledge of sin’ be, but knowledge of our weakness and badness? He does not say: ‘by the law comes knowledge of power or goodness’! All that the law does, on Paul’s testimony, is to make sin known.

It is from this passage that I derive my answer to you: that by the words of the law man is admonished and taught, not what he can do, but what he ought to do; that is, that he may know his sin, not that he may believe that he has any strength. Wherefore, my good Erasmus, as often as you confront me with the words of the law, so often shall I confront you with the words of Paul: ‘By the law is knowledge of sin’—not power of will! Gather together from the big concordances all the imperative words into one chaotic heap (not the words of promise, but the words of the law and its demand)—and I shall at once declare that they always show, not what men can do, or do do, but what they should do! Even grammarians and schoolboys at street corners know that nothing more is signified by verbs in the imperative mood than what ought to be done, and that what is done or can be done should be expressed by verbs in the indicative. How is it that you theologians are twice as stupid as schoolboys, in that as soon as you get hold of a single imperative verb you infer an indicative meaning, as though the moment a thing is commanded it is done, or can be done ? But there’s many a slip ’twixt the cup and the lip!—and things that you commanded and that were possible enough may yet not be done, so great a gulf is there between imperative and indicative statements in the simplest everyday matters! Yet in this business of keeping the law, which is as far out of our reach as heaven is from the earth and just as impossible of attainment, you make indicatives out of imperatives with such alacrity that the moment you hear the word of command: ‘do’, ‘keep’, ‘choose’, you will straightway have it that it has been kept, done, chosen or fulfilled, or that these things can be done by our own strength!

In the fourth place you cite from Deut. 3 (actually, 30) many similar references to choosing, turning away and keeping, such as: ‘if thou shalt keep’, ‘if thou shalt turn away’, ‘if thou shalt choose’. *‘All these words would be inappropriately spoken’* you say, *‘were man’s will not free for good.’* I reply: You, too, my good Diatribe, speak inappropriately enough when you deduce the freedom of the will from these words! You set out to prove mere endeavour and effort on the part of ‘free-will’; you quote no passage that proves such endeavour; but you quote passages which, if your inference held good, would ascribe everything to ‘free-will’! Let me here again distinguish words quoted from Scripture from the conclusion which the Diatribe tacks on to them. The words quoted are imperative, and tell us merely what ought to be done. Moses does not say: ‘you have the power and strength to choose’, but: ‘choose’, ‘keep’, ‘do’; he is conveying commandments to perform, not describing man’s ability. But the inference appended by the would-be-wise Diatribe runs thus: ‘therefore, man can do these things, else the commandments would be given in vain.’ To which we reply: Mistress Diatribe, you reason badly; you do not prove your inference; it is only to your own blind sleepy-headed self that it seems to be proven and to follow. However, the commandments are not given inappropriately or pointlessly; but in order that through them proud, blind man may learn the plague of his own impotence, should he try to do what is commanded.

Hence there is no force in your analogy when you remark: *‘Otherwise it would be just like saying to a man who was so bound that he could only stretch out his arm to his left; “Behold; thou hast excellent wine on thy right, and poison on thy left; on which thou wilt, stretch forth thy hand.”* ’ I am sure that these analogies give you enormous satisfaction. But yet you fail to see that if the analogies stand, they prove much more than you proposed to prove; indeed, they prove what you deny and would have disproved— that ‘free-will’ can do all things! Throughout your treatment you forget that you said that ‘free-will’ can do nothing without grace, and you prove that ‘free-will’ can do all things without grace! Your inferences and analogies go to prove, either that ‘free-will’ can of itself perform what is stated and commanded, or else that the commandments are given pointlessly, absurdly and inappropriately. But these are just the old songs of the Pelagians, which even the Sophists confuted, and which you have yourself condemned! Meanwhile, this absentmindedness and bad memory of yours indicates how little you know or care about your subject. And what can be more disgraceful in a rhetorician than to be constantly discussing and arguing matters that are off the point at issue; indeed, to be always declaiming against himself and his own case ?

So I conclude thus: The passages of Scripture which you cite are imperative; and they prove and establish nothing about the ability of man, but only lay down what is and is not to be done. Your inferences, or appendages, and your analogies, if they prove anything, prove that ‘free-will’ can do all things without grace. This you did not undertake to prove and, indeed, have denied. Consequently, ‘proofs’ of this sort are nothing but disproofs of the strongest kind.

Let me see if I can rouse the Diatribe from its lethargy. Suppose I argue thus: ‘When Moses says: “Choose life, and keep the commandment”, it is ridiculous for Moses to give such an injunction to man unless man is able to choose life and keep the commandment.’ Have I by this reasoning proved that ’free-will’ can do nothing good, or has in itself endeavour without strength of its own ? On the contrary. I have proved, by a pretty forcible argument, *either* that man can choose life and keep the commandment, as enjoined, *or* that Moses is a ridiculous legislator. But who would dare to say that Moses was a ridiculous legislator? It follows, therefore, that man can do what is commanded! This is how the Diatribe argues throughout, contrary to its own stated aim, by which it undertook, not to argue in this manner, but to show that there is a certain endeavour on the part of ‘free-will’. However, so far is it from proving that this is so, that it rarely mentions the matter throughout the entire sequence of its arguments; indeed, it rather proves the contrary, that it is all its own asserting and disputing that is absurd!

As for its being absurd that (according to the analogy introduced) a man whose right arm was bound should be ordered to stretch forth his hand to the right, when he could only reach out to his left—is it absurd, pray, that a man who has both arms bound, but who proudly maintains or ignorantly assumes that he is wholly competent in either direction, should be commanded to stretch forth his hand in one direction or the other, not in order to make fun of his captivity, but to disprove his false assumption of freedom and power, and to make him realise his ignorance of his own captivity and misery? The Diatribe constantly imagines a man who either can do what he is commanded, or at any rate knows that he cannot. But such a man is nowhere to be found. If there were such, then, in truth, either the commanding of impossibilities would be absurd, or the Spirit of Christ would be in vain. But the Scripture sets before us a man who is not only bound, wretched, captive, sick and dead, but who, through the operation of Satan his lord, adds to his other miseries that of blindness, so that he believes himself to be free, happy, possessed of liberty and ability, whole and alive. Satan knows that if men knew their own misery he could keep no man in his kingdom; God could not fail at once to pity and succour wretchedness that knew itself and cried to Him, for God is proclaimed with mighty praise throughout the Scripture as being near to the brokenhearted. Thus Isa. 61 bears witness that Christ was sent ‘to preach the gospel to the poor, and to heal the broken-hearted’. Hence, the work of Satan is to hold men so that they do not recognise their wretchedness, but presume that they can do everything that is stated. But the work of Moses the lawgiver is the opposite of this—namely, through the law to lay open to man his own wretchedness, so that, by thus breaking him down, and confounding him in his self-knowledge, he may make him ready for grace, and send him to Christ to be saved. Therefore, the function performed by the law is nothing to laugh at, but is most emphatically serious and necessary.

Those who now understand this much easily understand also that the Diatribe effects nothing whatsoever by all its string of arguments. It collects from the Scriptures nothing but imperative statements, the meaning and design of which it does not understand; then, by the addition of inferences and carnal similitudes of its own, it mixes such a mighty mouthful that it asserts and proves more than it had intended, and argues against itself. So there is no need to run through individual items any further; they are all met by a single answer, for they all rest on a single argument. However, in order that the Diatribe may be overthrown by that very mass of matter with which it sought to overthrow me, I shall proceed to review some of them.

Isa. i: ‘If ye be willing and hearken to me, ye shall eat the good things of the land’ (v. 19). Here the Diatribe considers that, *if there is no such thing as freedom of will, it would have been more fitting to say: ‘whether I will or no’.* The answer to this is clear enough from what was said above. Moreover, what fitness would there be were it said: ‘If *I* will, ye shall eat the good things of the land’ ? Does the Diatribe in its vast wisdom suppose that the good things of the land can be eaten against God’s will ? or that it is a rare new truth, that we receive good things only by the will of God ?

So with the words of Isa. 21: ‘If ye will inquire, inquire ye; return, come’ (v. 12). *‘What is the point of exhorting those who have no measure of power of their own?’* says the Diatribe. *‘It is like saying to someone bound in chains: “Move over here.”* ’ On the contrary, I reply, what is the point of citing passages which in themselves prove nothing, and by the addition of your inference (that is, by the perversion of their sense), ascribe everything to ‘free-will’, when what had to be proved was a certain endeavour only, and one that might not be ascribed to ‘free-will’ at that ?

The same may be said of the words of Isa. 45: ‘Assemble yourselves and come’ (v. 20); ‘Turn unto me, and ye shall be saved’ (v. 22); and Isa. 52: ‘Awake, awake’; ‘shake thyself from the dust’; ‘loose the bands of thy neck’ (vv. 1-2); and Jer. 15: ‘If thou wilt turn, then will I turn thee; and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth’ (v. 19). Zechariah indicates more plainly still the endeavour of ‘freewill’ and the grace prepared for him who endeavours: ‘Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the Lord’ (1.3).

### (ix) Of Erasmus’ confusion of law and gospel in Zech. 1.5; Jer. 15.19; Ezek. 18.25,etc. (680-684)

In these passages, our friend the Diatribe makes no distinction at all between the voices of the law and of the gospel; so blind and ignorant is it that it does not see what the law and the gospel are. Out of the whole of Isaiah it cites no word of the law save this one passage: ‘If ye be willing’ (Isa. 1.19); all the other passages quoted are gospel, by which the afflicted and brokenhearted are summoned to consolation by the word that offers grace. But the Diatribe makes of them words of the law! Pray tell me, what can a man do in the realm of theology and the sacred writings, if he has not even reached the point of knowing what the law and the gospel are, or, if he does know, scorns to observe the distinction? He is bound to mix up everything, heaven with hell and life with death, and will not take the slightest trouble to know about Christ. I shall instruct my friend the Diatribe at some length on this matter in what follows.

Look at the words of Jeremiah and Zechariah: ‘If thou wilt turn, then will I turn thee’, and: ‘turn ye unto me, and I will turn unto you’. Does it follow from: ‘turn ye’ that therefore you can turn ? Does it follow from: ‘Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart’ (Deut. 6.5) that therefore you can love with all your heart? What do arguments of this kind prove, but that ‘free-will’ does not need the grace of God, but can do all things by its own power? How much more proper is it to take the words as they stand! ‘If thou wilt turn, then will I also turn thee’; that is: ‘if thou wilt cease sinning, I also will cease punishing; and if thou shalt be converted and live well, I also will treat you well by turning away your captivity and woes.’ But it does not follow from this that man is converted by his own power, nor do the words say so; they simply say: ‘If thou wilt turn’, telling man what he should do. When he knows it, and sees that he cannot do it, he will ask whence he may find ability to do it—unless the Diatribe’s Leviathan (that is, its inferential appendage) intervenes to say: ‘if man cannot turn by his own power, “turn ye” is said in vain!’ Enough has been said of the nature and worth of this conclusion.

Only a person in' a stupor or a daze could think that the words: ‘turn ye’, ‘if thou wilt turn’, and the like, establish the power of‘free-will’, and yet not see that by parity of reasoning it is also established by this word: ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart’. For the meaning of Him who commands and requires is parallel in each case. The love of God is required no less than our conversion and the keeping of all the commandments; for the love of God is our true conversion. Yet no one tries to prove ‘free-will’ from the command to love; all argue from the words: ‘if thou wilt’, ‘if thou wilt hearken’, ‘turn ye’, and the like. If then it does not follow from that word (‘love the Lord thy God with all thy heart’) that ‘free-will’ has any existence or ability, it is certain that it does not follow either from the words: ‘if thou wilt’, ‘if thou wilt hear’, ‘turn ye’, and the like, which either require less, or require it less peremptorily, than the words: ‘Love God!’ ‘Love the Lord!’ Therefore, all that is said against concluding **in** favour of ‘free-will’ from this word, ‘love God’, must also be Said against concluding in favour of ‘free-will’ from any other words of command or requirement. If we suppose that the Command to love shows us the tenor of the law and our duty Only, but not our power of will or ability (inability, rather), then the same is shown by all other words of demand. It is an acknowledged fact that even the Schoolmen, with the exception of the Scotists and the Moderns, assert that man cannot love God with all his heart. That being so, he cannot perform any of the other precepts, for Christ assures us that they all hang on this one. Thus, even on the testimony of the Scholastic doctors, it remains sure that the words of the law do not prove the power of ‘free-will’, but show us the extent of our duty and our inability.

But our friend the Diatribe grows more stupid still; it not only infers from Zechariah’s words (‘Turn ye unto me’) an indicative sense, but further exerts itself to prove from them that ‘free-will’ makes endeavours and that grace is prepared for it when it endeavours. Here, at long last, it mentions its cherished ‘endeavour’, and, by a novel piece of grammar, takes ‘turn’ to mean ‘endeavour so to do’; so that the sense is: ‘turn ye unto me’ (that is, endeavour to turn), ‘and I will turn unto you’ (that is, I will endeavour to turn unto you). Thus it ends by attributing endeavour even to God! Perhaps it would have grace prepared for Him too on His endeavouring! For if‘turn’ means ‘endeavour’ in one place, why not everywhere ?

Again, it says that from the passage in Jer. 15 (‘If thou take forth the precious from the vile’) not only endeavour, but freedom of choice, is proved; which freedom it had previously declared to be lost, and turned into a necessity of serving sin! You see, then, that in handling the Scriptures the Diatribe employs ‘free-will’ with a vengeance, forcing statements of the same type to prove endeavour at one point, and freedom at another, just as it sees fit!

But away with these vanities. The word ‘turn’ is used in the Scriptures in two ways, the one legal, the other evangelical. In its legal use, it is an utterance of exaction and command, requiring, not endeavour, but a change in the whole life. Jeremiah frequently uses it in this sense, saying: ‘Turn ye now every one from his evil way’, and: ‘Turn ye unto the Lord’ (Jer. 25.5, 35.15, 4-i), where it is plain enough that he includes a requirement of all the commandments. In its evangelical sense, it is an utterance of divine consolation and promise, by which nothing is required of us, but the grace of God is offered to us. Such is this, in Ps. 15: ‘When the Lord shall turn again the captivity of Zion’ (Ps. 14.7, cf. 126.1); and this in Ps. 22: ‘Turn again unto thy rest, O my soul’ (Ps. 116.7, cf- 23.3). Zechariah has therefore set out in the shortest compass the proclamation of both law and grace. It is the whole sum of the law, when he says: ‘Turn ye unto me’; and it is grace when he says: ‘I will turn unto you.’Just as much as ‘free-will’ is proved from this word, ‘Love the Lord,’ or from any other word of a particular law, just so much is it proved from this word which summarizes the law: ‘Turn ye.’ It is the mark of a wise reader to notice which words in the Scripture are law and which are grace, so that he may not have everything muddled, like the filthy Sophists and this sleepy-headed Diatribe!

See how the Diatribe handles that famous passage in Ezek. 18: ‘As I live, saith the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live’ (v. 23). First, it says: *‘The expressions: “shall turn away”, “hath done”, “hath committed”, are repeated many times in this chapter with reference to both good and evil. Where then are they who deny that man can do anything?’* Pray, view this excellent inference! The Diatribes set out to prove that ‘free-will’ endeavours and desires, and proves instead that all is accomplished and everything fulfilled by ‘free-will’! Where now, pray, are those who need grace and the Holy Spirit? For thus it reasons, saying: *‘Ezekiel says, “If the wicked man shall turn away, and shall do righteousness and judgment, he shall live.” Therefore the wicked man straightway does so, and can do so.’* Ezekiel is signifying what should be done, but the Diatribe understands that it is being done, and has been done! Thus once more it would teach us, by its novel grammar, that owing and having, command and performance, requirement and rendering, are identical.

Then it twists that sweetest voice of the gospel, ‘I desire not the death of a sinner,’ etc., like this: *‘Does the righteous Lord deplore the death of his people which He Himself works in them? If He does not will our death, it must be laid to the charge of our own will if we perish. But what can you lay to the charge of him who can do no good or evil?’*

Pelagius sang this same tune long ago, when he assigned to ‘free-will’ not desire nor endeavour only, but complete power to do and fulfil all things. Your inferences, if they prove anything, prove this power, as I have said; so that they make with equal, indeed, with greater force against the Diatribe, which denies (this power of ‘free-will’ and would establish endeavour only, .than they do against us, who deny ‘free-will’ altogether. But we will say no more of the Diatribe’s ignorance, and speak to the subject itself.

It is the voice of the gospel, the sweetest consolation to miserable sinners, when Ezekiel says: ‘I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live.’ The words are in all respects like these of Ps. 28: ‘For His wrath is but for a moment, His will is rather life’ (Ps. 30.6); and of Ps. 68: ‘How sweet is Thy loving-kindness, O Lord’ (Ps. 36.7); .and: ‘For I am merciful’ (Jer. 3.12); and Christ’s word in Matt. 11: ‘Come unto me, all ye that labour, and I will refresh you’ (v. 28); and the words of Exod. 20: ‘I will show mercy unto many thousands to them that love me’ (v. 6). And what is rather more than half the Holy Scripture, but mere promises of grace, by which mercy, life, peace and salvation are offered by God to men? And what do the words of promise mean but this: ‘I desire not the death of a sinner’ ? Is not His saying: ‘I am merciful’, the same as if He were to say: ‘I am not angry, I am unwilling to punish, I desire not your death, My will is to pardon, My will is to spare’ ? If those Divine promises did not stand firm, to raise up consciences tormented with a sense of sin and terrified by fear of death and judgment, what place would there be for pardon or for hope ? What sinner would not sink in despair? But as ‘free-will’ is not proved by any of the other words of mercy or promise or comfort, so neither is it proved by this: ‘I desire not the death of a sinner’, etc.

But our friend the Diatribe, again making no distinction between words of law and words of promise, makes this passage of Ezekiel the voice of the law, and expounds it thus: *T desire not the death of a sinner,’ that is, "I desire not that he should sin mortally, or become a sinner guilty of death, but rather that he should be converted from sin, if he has committed any, and so live.’* If it did not thus expound it, the passage would be an irrelevance. But this is completely to overthrow and destroy this sweetest word of Ezekiel: ‘I desire not the death’. If we in our blindness will read and understand the Scriptures thus, what wonder if they are obscure and ambiguous ? God does not say: 'I desire not the sin of man’, but: ‘I desire not the death of a sinner’; clearly indicating that He is speaking of the punishment of sin, of which the sinner is sensible by reason of his sin—that is, of the fear of death. He is raising up and comforting the sinner as he lies under this torment and despair, in order that he might not break the bruised reed and quench the smoking flax, but create for him a hope of pardon and salvation, so that he might rather be converted (that is, by saving conversion from the penalty of death) and might live (that is, might be well, and rejoice with an untroubled conscience). For this also must be noted: that as the voice of the law is brought to bear only upon those who neither feel nor know their sins, as Paul says in Rom. 3 (‘By the law is the knowledge of sin’ [v. 20]), so the word of grace comes only to those who are distressed by a sense of sin and tempted to despair. Therefore, in all the words of the law you will find reference made to sin, as we are shown what we ought to do; and so, on the other hand, in all the words of promise you will find mention made of the evil under which sinners (those, at any rate, that are to be raised up) are labouring. So here, in the words: ‘I desire riot the death of a sinner’, it plainly mentions ‘death’ and ‘a sinner’, both the evil that is felt and the man who feels it. But in the words: ‘Love God with all thine heart’, what is intimated is, not the evil that we feel, but the good that we ought to do, in order that we might know how unable we are to do that good.

Nothing, therefore, could be quoted in support of ‘free-will’ less appropriately than this passage of Ezekiel; indeed, it makes most strongly against ‘free-will’. For it is here shown in what state ‘free-will’ is, and what its ability is in the matter of recognising sin and turning from it—that is, that it cannot but fall into a worse condition, and add to its sins despair and impenitence, unless God comes straightway to its help and calls it back and raises it up by the word of promise. The careful concern of God in promising grace to recall and raise up the sinner is itself a sufficiently great and trusty proof that ‘freewill’ of itself cannot but grow worse and, as Scripture says, ‘go down to hell’ (cf. Prov. 5.5)—unless you believe that God is the kind of trifler who pours out words of promise in such abundance, not from any need of them for our salvation, but just because He likes talking! Thus you see that not only do all the words of law stand against ‘free-will’, but also that all the Words of promise utterly refute it—that is, that the whole Scripture fights against it!

Hence, you see, this word: ‘I desire not the death of a sinner’ **is** concerned only to proclaim and offer to the world the mercy **of** God. None receive it with joy and gratitude but those who are distressed and troubled at death, those in whom the law has already completed its work, that is, given knowledge of sin. Those that have not yet experienced the work of the law, who do not recognise their sin and have no sense of death, scorn the mercy promised by that word.

### (x) Of God preached and not preached, and of His revealed and secret will (684-686)

As to why some are touched by the law and others not, so that some receive and others scorn the offer of grace, that is another question, which Ezekiel does not here discuss. He speaks of the published offer of God’s mercy, not of the dreadful[^12] hidden will of God, Who, according to His own counsel, ordains such persons as He wills to receive and partake of the mercy preached and offered. This will is not to be inquired into, but to be reverently adored, as by far the most awesome secret of the Divine Majesty. He has kept it to Himself and forbidden us to know it; and it is much more worthy of reverence than an infinite number of Corycian caverns!

When, now the Diatribe reasons thus: *‘Does the righteous Lord deplore the death of His people which He Himself works in them? This seems too ridiculous’—*I reply, as I have already said: we must discuss God, or the will of God, preached, revealed, offered to us, and worshipped by us, in one way, and God not preached, nor revealed, nor offered to us, nor worshipped by us, in another way. Wherever God hides Himself, and wills to be unknown to us, there we have no concern. Here that sentiment: ‘what is above us does not concern us’, really holds good. Lest any should think that this distinction is my own, I am following Paul, who writes to the Thessalonians of Antichrist that ‘he should exalt himself above all that is God preached and worshipped’ (2 Thess. 2.4); clearly intimating that a man can be exalted above God as He is preached and worshipped, that is, above the word and worship of God, by which He is known to us and has dealings with us. But above God not worshipped and not preached, that is, God as He is in His own nature and Majesty, nothing can be exalted, but all things are under His powerful hand.

Now, God in His own nature and majesty is to be left alone; in this regard, we have nothing to do with Him, nor does He wish us to deal with Him. We have to do with Him as clothed and displayed in His Word, by which He presents Himself to us. That is His glory and beauty, in which the Psalmist proclaims Him to be clothed (cf. Ps. 21.5). I say that the righteous God does not deplore the death of His people which He Himself works in them, but He deplores the death which He finds in His people and desires to remove from them. God preached works to the end that sin and death may be taken away, and we may be saved. ‘He sent His word and healed them’ (Ps. 107.20). But God hidden in Majesty neither deplores nor takes away death, but works life, and death, and all in all; nor has He set bounds to Himself by His Word, but has kept Himself free over all things.

The Diatribe is deceived by its own ignorance in that it makes no distinction between God preached and God hidden, that is, between the Word of God and God Himself. God does many things which He does not show us in His Word, and He wills many things which He does not in His Word show us that He wills. Thus, He does not will the death of a sinner—that is, in His Word; but He wills it by His inscrutable will. At present, however, we must keep in view His Word and leave alone His inscrutable will; for it is by His Word, and not by His inscrutable will, that we must be guided. In any case, who can direct himself according to a will that is inscrutable and incomprehensible ? It is enough simply to know that there is in God an inscrutable will; what, why, and within what limits It wills, it is wholly unlawful to inquire, or wish to know, or be concerned about, or touch upon; we may only fear and adore!

So it is right to say: ‘If God does not desire our death, it must be laid to the charge of our own will if we perish’; this, I repeat, is right if you spoke of God preached. For He desires that all men should be saved, in that He comes to all by the word of salvation, and the fault is in the will which does not receive Him; as He says in Matt. 23: ‘How often would I have gathered thy children together, and thou wouldst not!’ (v. 37). But why the Majesty does not remove or change this fault of will in every man (for it is not in the power of man to do it), or why He lays this fault to the charge of the will, when man cannot avoid it, it is not lawful to ask; and though you should ask much, you would never find out; as Paul says in Rom. 11: ‘Who art thou that repliest against God?’ (Rom. 9.20).

### (xi) Deut. 30.11-14: obligation is no evidence for ability (686-688)

After this the Diatribe argues: *‘If it is not in the power of every man to keep what is commanded, all the exhortations in the Scriptures, and all the promises, threats, expostulations, reproofs, adjurations, blessings, curses and hosts of precepts, are of necessity useless.’*

The Diatribe is continually forgetting the question at issue, and dealing with matters foreign to its purpose; and it does not see that all these things make more strongly against itself than against us. From all these passages it proves freedom and ability to fulfil all things, as the very words of the inference which it draws declare; whereas, its intention was to establish *such a free-will’ as can will no good without grace, and an endeavour that may not be ascribed to one’s own strength.* I do not see that such an endeavour is proved by any of these passages, which only demand duty. This I should have said too often already, were it not that it has to be repeated many times, because the Diatribe harps so often on the same wrong note, putting its readers off with a useless profusion of words.

Almost the last passage which it brings forward from the Old Testament is Moses’ word in Deut. 30: ‘This commandment which I command thee this day is not above thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldst say, Who of us shall go up to heaven and bring it down to us, that we may hear it, and do it ? But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.’ The Diatribe claims that *this passage declares that what is commanded is not only set within us, but is like falling off a log·,[^13]* that is, it is easy, or at any rate not hard. Thank you for such vast erudition! If Moses so plainly declares that there is in us, not merely a power, but also an aptitude, for keeping all the commandments, why do I labour so hard ? Why did I not straightway produce this passage, and assert ‘free-will’ before all the world ? What need now of Christ? What need of the Spirit? We have now found a passage which stops the mouths of all; not only does it clearly assert the freedom of the will, but it clearly teaches also that keeping the commandments is easy! What a fool was Christ, Who shed His blood to purchase for us the Spirit, Whom we do not need, in order that we might be made able to keep the commandments with ease, when we are so already by nature! Yes, and now let the Diatribe itself recant its own words, where it said that ‘free-will’ can will no good without grace! Let it now say that ‘free-will’ has such power that it not only wills good, but keeps the greatest commandments, yes, all the commandments, with ease!

Pray see what a disaffected mind can do, how it cannot help giving itself away! Is there still need to refute the Diatribe? Who could refute it more effectively than it refutes itself? It is truly a beast that eats itself! How true it is that a liar should have a good memory!

I spoke of this place in Deuteronomy before; I shall now discuss it briefly, and without reference to Paul, who handles the passage powerfully in Rom. 10 (vv. 5ff). You see that nothing at all, not a single syllable, is said here of ease or difficulty, or of the power or impotence of ‘free-will’ or man to keep or not keep the commandments; but those who would entangle Scripture in their own inferences and ideas render it obscure and ambiguous to themselves, that so they may make of it what they please. If you cannot turn your eyes, at least turn your ears, or feel with your hands! Moses says: ‘it is not above thee, neither is it far off, nor is it in heaven nor across the sea’. What does ‘above thee’ mean? and ‘far off’? and ‘in heaven’ ? and ‘across the sea’ ? Will they introduce such obscurity into our grammar and our commonest words that we shall not be able to say anything with a sure meaning, just in order to make their point that the Scriptures are obscure? According to my grammar, these words signify neither the extent nor the degree of human power, but local distance. ‘Above thee’ does not refer to any power of the will, but to a place that is above us. In the same way, ‘far off’, ‘in heaven’, ‘across the sea’, do not refer to any power in man, but to a place at a distance above us, to the right, to the left, behind us or over against us. Someone may laugh at me for arguing at this elementary level,[^14] setting before such great men a primer, as one would before schoolboys who did not know their ABC,

. and teaching them how to put syllables together; but what can I do, when I see them looking for darkness in such clear light, and aspiring to be blind ? They list a vast sequence of ages, many wits, saints, martyrs and doctors; they flaunt this passage of Moses most overbearingly; yet they will not deign to look at the syllables, nor to rule their thoughts so far as to give a moment’s consideration to the passage of which they boast! Let the Diatribe now come and tell us how it is possible for one ordinary person[^15] to see what all these public figures, the chief men of all these ages, did not see! Even a schoolboy would conclude that this passage proves them to have been blind pretty often!

What then does Moses mean by these extremely plain and clear words, if not that he has excellently discharged his office as a faithful lawgiver, one who does everything necessary to ensure that men have the commandments set before them, and know them; and that therefore no place is left them for making excuse that they did not know the commandments, or did not possess them, or were obliged to seek them elsewhere; so that if they do not keep them, the fault is not in the law or the law-giver, but in themselves. The law is with them, and the lawgiver has taught them, so that there is left them no excuse on grounds of ignorance, but only the accusation of negligence and disobedience. ‘It is not necessary,’ he says, ‘to fetch the laws from heaven, or from lands across the sea, or from far away, nor can you make the excuse that you never had them or heard them; you have them nigh unto you; you have heard God command them by my mouth, and you have known them in your hearts; you have received them as a subject for continual exposition in your midst by the Levites, as this word and book of mine bear witness; only this remains, that you should do them.’ What, pray, is here attributed to ‘free-will’ save that the keeping of the laws which it has is required of it, and the excuse of ignorance and absence of the laws is taken from it?

These are the passages which the Diatribe quotes for ‘freewill’ from the Old Testament. Now that they are answered, nothing remains that is not equally answered, whether or not it should quote more, or intend to quote more; for it can quote nothing but imperative or hypothetical passages, or wishes,[^16]by which is signified, not what we can do, or do do (as I have often repeated to the repetitive Diatribe), but what we ought to do, and what is required of us, so that our impotence may be made known to us, and the knowledge of sin may be given to us. Or else, if they prove anything, by the addition of inferences and similes invented by human reason they prove this: that ‘free-will’ has, not just some small degree of endeavour or desire, but full force and completely free power to do all things, without the grace of God and without the Holy Spirit. Thus, nothing is less proved by the whole of this discursive, repetitive and laboured discussion than that which had to be proved, that is, the *‘probable view’* which describes ‘free-will’ as *so impotent that it cannot will any good without grace, but is forced into the service of sin; though it has endeavour, which yet may not be ascribed to its own strength.* A real freak!—it can do nothing in its own strength, and yet it has endeavour within its own strength; its constitution involves a very obvious contradiction!

### (xii) Matt. 23.37: man must not pry into the secret will of God (688-690)

Now we come to the New Testament, where there is once more marshalled in defence of the wretched slavery of ‘freewill’ a host of imperative sentences; and all the auxiliaries of carnal reason, that is, inferences and similes, are gathered with them. It is like seeing in a picture or a dream the king of flies and his host, armed with lances of hay and shields of straw, opposing a real, proper array of human warriors. Such as the man-made dreams of the Diatribe as they oppose the armies of the Word of God!

The words of Matt. 23 come forth in front, the Achilles of the flies: Ό Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, and thou wouldst not’ (v. 37). *‘If all comes to pass by necessity,’* says the Diatribe, *‘could not Jerusalem have justly answered the Lord, “Why dost thou weary thyself with useless tears? If thou didst not wish us to hearken to the prophets, why didst thou send them? Why dost thou lay to our charge that which came to pass at Thy will, and so by necessity in us?” ’* So speaks the Diatribe. I reply: Granting for the moment that the Diatribe’s inference and conclusion is good and true, what, I ask, does it prove? Does it prove that ‘probable view’ which says that ‘free-will’ cannot will good ? Indeed, no, it proves that the will is free, whole and able to do all that the prophets said. But the Diatribe did not set out to prove such a will. Nay, let the Diatribe answer this question: If ‘free-will’ cannot will good, why is it laid to its charge that it did not hear the prophets, who taught good things, and whom therefore it could not hear by its own strength ? Why does Christ weep over them with empty tears, as though they could have willed what He knew For certain that they could not will? Let the Diatribe free Christ from the charge of madness in the light of that *‘probable view’,* and my view is at once set free from the Achilles of the flies. So this passage in Matthew either proves plenary ‘freewill’, or else it makes with equal force against the Diatribe and lays it low with its own weapon!

I say, as I said before, that we may not debate the secret will of Divine Majesty, and that the recklessness of man, who shows unabated perversity in leaving necessary matters for an attempted assault on that will, should be withheld and restrained from employing itself in searching out those secrets of Divine Majesty; for man cannot attain unto them, seeing that, as Paul tells us (cf. 1 Tim. 6.16), they dwell in inaccessible light. But let man occupy himself with God Incarnate, that is, with Jesus crucified, in whom, as Paul says (cf. Col. 2.3), are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge (though hidden); for by Him man has abundant instruction both in what he should and in what he should not know.

Here, God Incarnate says: 'I would, and thou wouldst not.’ God Incarnate, I repeat, was sent for this purpose, to will, say, do, suffer, and offer to all men, all that is necessary for salvation ; albeit He offends many who, being abandoned or hardened by God’s secret will of Majesty, do not receive Him thus willing, speaking, doing and offering. As John says: ‘The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not’ (John 1.5). And again: ‘He came unto His own, and His own received Him not’ (v. 11). It belongs to the same God Incarnate to weep, lament, and groan over the perdition of the ungodly, though that will of Majesty purposely leaves and reprobates some to perish. Nor is it for us to ask why He does so, but to stand in awe of God, Who can do, and wills to do, such things. I do not think anyone will raise the quibbling objection that this will, of which it is said: ‘How often would I!’, was displayed to the Jews even before God was incarnate, inasmuch as they are accused of having slain the prophets before Christ, and of resisting His will thereby. For it is well known among Christians that all that was done through the prophets was done in the name of the coming Christ, Who had been promised, that he might become God Incarnate. Thus all that has been offered to men through the ministry of the Word from the beginning of the world may rightly be called the will of Christ.

But here Reason, in her knowing and talkative way, will say: ‘This is a nice way out that you have invented—that, whenever we are hard pressed by force of arguments, wc run back to that dreadful will of Majesty, and reduce our adversary to silence when he becomes troublesome in the manner of the astrologers, who by inventing their “epicycles” dodge all questions about the movement of the entire heavens.’ I reply: This is not my invention, but a command grounded on the Divine Scriptures. In Rom. 11, Paul says: ‘Why then does God find fault? Who shall resist His will ? O man, who art thou that contendest with God? Hath not the potter power?’ and so on (Rom. 9.19, 21). And before him Isaiah said, in chapter 58: ‘Yet they seek me daily, and desire to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness: they ask of me the ordinances of justice, and desire to approach unto God’ (v. 2). I think these words make it clear enough that it is not lawful for men to search into the will of Majesty. Furthermore, the subject is of such a kind that perverse men are most strongly provoked to seek after that dreadful will; here most of all, therefore, is the place to urge upon them silence and reverence. In other subjects, of which we can and are commanded to give an account, we do not do this. If, however, any do not yield to our admonition here, but persist in searching out the procedure of that will, we let him go on and, like the giants, fight with God; we watch to see what triumph he will gain, sure that he will in no way hinder our cause nor advance his own. For it will still continue unalterably fixed that either he will prove that ‘free-will’ can do all things, or else the Scriptures he quotes will fight against himself. Whichever happens, he lies vanquished and I stand victorious!

### (xiii) Matt, 19.17: the law indicates the impotence of man, and the saving power of God (690-691)

A second passage is in Matt. 19: ‘If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments’ (v. 17). *‘With what conscience could “if thou wilt” be said to him whose will is not free?’* says the Diatribe. To this I say: Is the will then free, according to this word of Christ? You wanted to prove that ‘free-will’ can will no good, and that without grace it necessarily serves sin. With what conscience, then, do you now make it wholly free? The same will be said of these words: ‘if thou wilt be perfect’; ‘if any man will come after me’; ‘he that wills to save his life’; ‘if ye love me’; ‘if ye shall continue’. In sum, as I have said— let every occurrence of the conjunction ‘if’, and all imperative verbs, be collected together (so that we may help the Diatribe along with a good number of words, at any rate!). *‘All these precepts are useless,’* it tells us, *‘if nothing is attributed to the human will. How ill does that conjunction “if" accord with mere necessity?’* I reply: If they are useless, it is your fault that they are useless and, indeed, amount to nothing; for one moment you assert that nothing is to be attributed to ‘free-will’, making ‘free-will’ unable to will good, and here, on the contrary, you make it able to will all good! Or is it that to your mind the same words are freezing and flaming at the same time, asserting and denying everything at once?

And I wonder why our author takes a delight in repeating the same thing so often, always forgetting his stated intention; unless perhaps it is that he lacks confidence in his case, and wants to overcome his opponent by the sheer bulk of his book, or to drain his strength with the wearisome labour of reading it! By what consequence, I ask, does it follow that will and power must forthwith be present whenever it says: ‘If thou wilt’, ‘If any man will’, ‘If thou shalt’ ? Do we not very commonly indicate impotence and impossibility, rather, by means of such expressions? For instance: ‘If you want to equal Vergil as a poet, my good Maevius, you must sing a different strain.’ ‘If you want to surpass Cicero, Scotus, you must replace your subtleties with the highest eloquence.’ ‘If you want to stand comparison with David, you must produce psalms like his.’ Here are plainly intimated things that are impossible by our own powers, though they may all be done by the power of God. So it is in the Scriptures: by means of such expressions, we are shown what can be done in us by the power of God, and what we cannot do ourselves.

Moreover, if such language were used of things which it is utterly impossible to do, things which even God would never do, then the words might rightly be called ‘useless’ or ‘absurd,’ for they would be spoken in vain. But as it is, they are used, not only to show up the impotence of ‘free-will’, which can effect none of the things mentioned, but also to intimate that a time will come when all these things shall be done—but by a power not our own; that is, by the power of God. This follows, at all events, if we allow that such expressions contain any indication of what can and must be done; as if one should explain: ‘If thou wilt keep the commandments’ like this: ‘if ever thou shalt have the will to keep the commandments (which you will have, not of yourself, but of God, who gives it to whom He will), then they also shall preserve thee.’ Or, to put it more fully: These words, especially those that are hypothetical, seem also to be put as they are on account of the predestination of God, which is unknown to us, and they include it in their scope; as if they mean to say this: ‘If thou art willing, if thou shalt be willing’ (that is, if thou art such with God that He sees fit to give thee this will to keep the commandments) ‘thou shalt be saved.’ By means of this figure of speech, we are enabled to understand the twin truths, namely, that we can do nothing of ourselves, and that anything that we do God works in us. This would be my reply to those who are not content to have it said that these words show up our impotence only, and claim that they also prove some power and ability in us to do the things commanded. In this way, it would also become true that we can do none of the things commanded, and yet at the same time we can do them all; true, that is, if we ascribe our impotence to our own strength and our ability to the grace of God.

### (xiv) That the purpose of precepts under the New Testament is to guide the justified (692-693)

In the third place, this thought moves the Diatribe: ‘ *When mention is so often made of good and bad works,’* it says, *‘I do not understand how there can be any place for mere necessity, for neither nature nor necessity has merit.’* I understand only this: that whereas the ‘probable view’ asserts ‘mere necessity’ when it says that ‘free-will’ can will no good, here the Diatribe actually assigns merit to that will! ‘Free-will’ has made such strides as the book grows and the Diatribe’s argument advances that now it not only possesses endeavour and effort of its own (though by another’s strength)—nay, it not only wills and does good—it also merits eternal life, according to Christ’s words: ‘Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven’ (Matt. 5.12). ‘Your reward’ means the reward of ‘free-will’ (for so the Diatribe understands this passage); so that Christ and the Spirit of God are nothing! What need of them is there, if we have good works and merit by ‘free-will’? I say this so that we may see that it is no rare thing for men of superior intellect to be habitually blind in a matter that would be clear even to a dull and untrained mind; and that we may also see how weak is the argument from human authority in the things of God, where God’s authority alone avails.

Here we must speak of two things: *first,* the commandments of the New Testament; *second,* merit. We shall deal with each in short compass, having spoken of them more fully elsewhere.

The New Testament, properly speaking, consists of promises and exhortations, just as the Old, properly speaking, consists of laws and threats. In the New Testament, the gospel is preached and this is just the word that offers the Spirit and grace for the remission of sins which was procured for us by Christ crucified. It is all entirely free, given by the mercy of God the Father alone as He shows His favour towards us, who are unworthy, and who deserve condemnation rather than anything else. Exhortations follows after this; and they are intended to stir up those who have obtained mercy and have been justified already, to be energetic in bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit and of the righteousness given them, to exercise themselves in love and good works, and boldly to bear the cross and all the other tribulations of this world. This is the whole sum of the New Testament. But the complete failure of the Diatribe to understand it is sufficiently declared by the fact that it does not know how to make any distinction between the Old and the New Testaments; for it sees nothing anywhere but laws and comments, by which men may be moulded in good manners. What rebirth, renewal, regeneration and the whole work of the Spirit are, it does not see at all. I am amazed and astounded that a man who has spent so much time in studying the sacred writings should be so utterly ignorant. This passage, then (‘Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven’), squares as well with ‘free-will’ as light agrees with darkness. Christ is there exhorting, not ‘free-will’, but the Apostles, who at that time not only were in grace, higher than ‘free-will’ can rise, and so were righteous; they were actually engaged in the ministry of the word, which is the highest point of grace; and Christ is there telling them to endure the tribulations of the world. But our present debate specifically concerns ‘free-will’ without grace; which is taught by laws and threats (the Old Testament) to know itself, that it might run to the promises offered in the New Testament.

(xv) *That the ground of reward under the New Testament is the promise of God, not the merit of man* (693-696)

As for merit, or the proposal of a reward, what is it but a kind of promise ? But that promise does not prove that we can do anything; it proves only this, that if anyone does this or that, he shall then have a reward. And our question is, not what reward will be given, nor how it will be given, but, whether we can do the things for which the reward is given. That is what needed to be established. Is not this ridiculous logic: The prize is set before all in the race; therefore, all can run and obtain it? If Caesar conquers Turkey, he will gain the kingdom of Syria; therefore, Caesar can and does conquer Turkey! If ‘free-will’ rules sin, it shall be holy before the Lord; therefore, ‘free-will’ is holy before the Lord! Away with such excessive follies, such patent absurdities (though it is highly appropriate that ‘free-will’ should be *established* by such fine arguments as these!). Let us instead speak to this point: *necessity has neither merit nor reward.* If we speak of *necessity of compulsion,* it is true; but if we speak of *necessity of immutability,* it is false. Who would reward an unwilling workman, or ascribe merit to him? But for those who do good and evil willingly, even though they cannot alter their will by their own strength, reward and punishment follow *naturally* and *necessarily*; as it is written: ‘thou shalt render unto every man according to his works’ (cf. Ps. 62.12). *Natural* consequence is this: if you sink under water, you will be drowned; if you swim out of it, you will be saved. In a word: In the matter of merit and reward, we deal with either *worthiness* or *consequence.* If you have *worthiness* in view, there is no merit and no reward. If ‘free-will’ cannot will good by itself alone, but wills good by grace alone (for we are speaking of ‘free-will’ apart from grace, and inquiring into the proper power of each), who does not see that the good will, and merit, and reward, are of grace alone ? And here again the Diatribe disagrees with itself; for it argues the freedom of the will from the fact of merit, and hereby comes under the same condemnation as do I, against whom it contends—that is, its claim that there are such things as merit, and reward, and freedom, wars against it no less than I do; seeing that it asserted earlier that ‘free-will’ wills no good, and undertook to prove as much! If, on the other hand, you have *consequences* in view, there is nothing, good or evil, that has not its reward. And hence comes the mistake, that, in the matter of merits and rewards, we ponder unprofitable thoughts and questions about *worthiness* (which is non-existent) when we ought to be discussing *consequence* alone. Hell and the judgment of God await the wicked as a necessary consequence; though they do not themselves desire or conceive of such a reward for their sins, and indeed think it abominable and, as Peter says, rail against it (cf. 2 Pet 2.12). In the same way, a kingdom awaits the godly, though they themselves neither seek it nor think of it; for it was prepared for them by their Father, not only before they themselves existed, but before the foundation of the world (cf. Matt. 25.34). Indeed, should they do good works in order to obtain the kingdom, they never would obtain it, but would belong rather to the number of the ungodly, who with an evil, mercenary eye seek the things of self even in God. The sons *of God,* however, do good with a will free from self-concern,[^17]seeking no reward, but the glory and will of God only, and ready to do good even if (though this is impossible) there was neither a kingdom nor a hell.

These things are, I think, sufficiently established by that single saying of Christ which I have just cited from Matt. 25: ‘Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world’ (v. 34). How do they *merit* what is already theirs, and was prepared for them before they were in existence? We could more accurately say that it is rather the kingdom of God that merits its possessors; so putting the merit where our opponents put the reward, and the reward where they put the merit. The kingdom is not in process of preparation, but was prepared before, and the sons of the kingdom do not prepare the kingdom, but are in process of being prepared themselves; that is, the kingdom merits the sons, not the sons the kingdom. So also hell rather merits and makes ready its sons; for Christ says: ‘Depart, ye cursed, into eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his angels’ (v. 41).

What then is the meaning of all those Scriptures which promise the kingdom and threaten hell? Why is the word ‘reward’ repeated so often in the Scriptures ? ‘There is a reward for thy work’ (2 Chron. 15.7). ‘I am thy exceeding great reward’ (Gen. 15.1). Again: ‘Who rendereth to every man according to his work’ (cf. Job 34.11). And Paul says in Rom. 2: ‘To those who by patient continuance in well-doing seek eternal life’ (v. 7); and there are many similar statements. The answer is that what is established by all these passages is simply a *consequence of reward,* not in any way a *worthiness of merit',* inasmuch as those who do good do not do so in a servile, mercenary spirit, with a view to gaining eternal life—although they seek eternal life in the sense that they are in the way by which they will find and attain eternal life; so that their ‘seeking’ is an earnest striving and diligent endeavour after that which regularly follows upon a good life. The reason why the future consequences of a good and a bad life are declared in the Scriptures is that men might be instructed, disturbed, awakened and terrified. As ‘by the law is the knowledge of sin,’ and instruction concerning our impotence—by which, however, it is not implied that we ourselves can do anything; so by these promises and threats comes a warning of what follows upon the sin and impotence which the law has pointed out—but they do not ascribe any worthiness to our merit. Wherefore, as the words of the law serve their turn by instruction and illumination, to teach us both what we ought to do and what we cannot do, so the words of reward, signifying what is to be, serve their turn by exhorting and threatening, and animate, comfort and uphold the godly to press on, persevere and triumph in doing good and enduring evil, lest they should be wearied, or their spirit broken. So Paul exhorts his Corinthian converts, saying: ‘Quit you like men, knowing that your labour is not in vain in the Lord’ (cf. 1 Cor. 16.13, 15.58). So also God upholds Abraham, saying: ‘I am thy exceeding great reward’ (Gen. 15.1). It is just as if you were to comfort someone by intimating to him that his works certainly please God. This is a kind of consolation which Scripture often employs. And it is no small consolation to know that one pleases God, so that nothing untoward can follow, impossible though that may seem to be.

This is the intention of all that is said about our hope and expectation that the things which we hope for shall certainly be (though the godly do not hope merely on account of these things, nor do they seek such things for their own sake). So too by the words of threatening and future judgment the ungodly are terrified and cast down, so that they may cease and abstain from wickedness, and not become puffed up, and complacent, and vainglorious, in their sins.

If Reason should here wrinkle up her nose and say: ‘Why does God will that these things be done by His words, when nothing is achieved by such words, and the will cannot turn itself in either direction ? Why does He not do what He does without speaking a word, when He can do all things without a word ? For a will that has heard His Word can do and does no more than before, if the inner moving of the Spirit is wanting; nor could it avail or do any less without the Word being spoken, if the Spirit was with it; for all depends on the power and operation of the Spirit’ to this I shall say: It has pleased God not to give the Spirit without the Word, but through the Word; that He might have us as workers together with Him, we sounding forth without what He alone breathes within wheresoever He will. This He could do without the Word; but He will not. And who are we to inquire into the cause of the Divine will ? It is enough for us to know that God so wills, and it becomes us to worship, love and adore His will, bridling the presumption of reason. Thus, he might feed us without bread; he has, indeed, given us power to feed without bread, as Matt. 4 tells us: ‘Man is not fed by bread alone, but by the word of God’ (v. 4); yet it has pleased Him to feed us by means of bread, by the provision of bread without, and by His Word within.

It stands sure, therefore, that merit is not proved from reward, not at any rate in the Scriptures; and also that ‘free-will’ is not proved from merit, much less such a ‘free-will’ as the Diatribe set out to prove, one which of itself can will no good! Even it you grant merit, and add to it your usual ‘rational’ similes and inferences, thus: ‘in vain is it commanded, in vain is the reward promised, in vain are threats directed, if the will is not free’—all these arguments, I repeat, if they prove anything, prove this: that ‘free-will’ can do all things by itself! For if it cannot do all things by itself, it remains the ‘rational’ inference that therefore, precepts, promises and threats are given in vain.

Thus, the Diatribe perpetually argues against itself in its argument against me. God alone by His Spirit works in us both merit and reward, but by His word without He intimates and declares them both to the whole world, so that His power and glory and our own impotence and vileness may be proclaimed even among the wicked, unbelieving and ignorant. But only the godly receive these things into their hearts and faithfully keep them; the rest despise them.

### (xvi) Matt. 7.16; Luke 25.54; John 1.12; Rom. 2.4: necessity does not destroy moral responsibility (696-699)

It would be too wearisome to go over each imperative passage which the Diatribe enumerates from the New Testament, always tacking on its own inferences and arguing that what is said is ‘purposeless’, ‘useless’, ‘absurd’, ‘nothing at all’, unless the will is free. I have spent a long time saying, and am heartily sick of saying,[^18] that such words effect nothing, and, if they prove anything, they prove a plenary ‘free-will’, which is precisely to overthrow the entire Diatribe; for it set out to prove a ‘freewill’ that can do no good and serves sin, and it actually proves a ‘free-will’ that can do all things! How ignorant and unmindful of itself it continually is!

So it is mere quibbling when it speaks as follows: ‘ *“By their fruits ye shall know them;’ saith the Lord* (Matt. 7.16). *He calls works “fruits”, and calls them “ours”; but they are not ours, if all is carried on by necessity.’* Are not things which we did not produce ourselves, but received from others, spoken of as ‘ours’ in the most proper sense?[^19] Why then should not works which God gave us by His Spirit be called ours? Shall we omit to call Christ ours, because we only received Him, and did not create Him? Again: if we create the things that are called ours, it follows that we created our eyes, we created our hands, we created our feet for ourselves; unless our eyes, hands and feet are not to be called ours! Indeed, says Paul, what have we that we did not receive (cf. i Cor. 4.7) ? Shall we then say, either that all this is not ours, or else that we created it all ourselves ? Imagine, now, that our ‘fruits’ are called ours because we produce them—what place remains for grace, and the Spirit? Christ does not say: ‘By their fruits, *of which a tiny element is their own,* ye shall know them’! It is rather these trivial objections that are *absurd,* and *superfluous,* and *useless,* yes, and stupid and detestable; for they defile and profane holy words of God.

A similarly trifling account is given of Christ’s words on the cross: ‘Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do’ (Luke 23.34). Here, instead of the expected statement that should establish ‘free-will’, recourse is again had to inferences. *‘With how much more justice’,* says the Diatribe, *‘might He have excused them, on the ground that they have no “free-will”, and cannot do otherwise if they would?’* But this inference does not prove the ‘free-will’ which can will no good, which is what we are discussing; it proves the ‘free-will’ that can do all things, which nobody is discussing, and which everybody except the Pelagians denies! Now, when Christ openly states that ‘they know not what they do’, does He not thereby bear witness that they were unable to will good ? For how can you will that which you do not know? You certainly cannot desire the unknown! What stronger statement can be made against ‘free-will’ than that it is such a nonentity that it not only cannot will good, but does not even know how much evil it is doing, and what good is ? Is there *obscurity* in any single word of the statement: ‘They know not what they do’ ? What is left in the Scriptures that cannot affirm ‘free-will’ at the Diatribe’s prompting, when this word of Christ’s, which is so clear and so entirely against it, is made to affirm it ? One could as easily say that ‘free-will’ is affirmed by this: ‘And the earth was without form and void’ (Gen. 1.2), or: ‘God rested on the seventh day’ (Gen. 2.2), or the like! Then the Scriptures would in truth be obscure and ambiguous; they would, indeed, be at the same moment everything and nothing! But to dare to handle God’s words in this way argues a mind that is notable for its contempt of both God and man, and deserves no forbearance whatsoever.

Again, the Diatribe takes these words from John i: ‘To them gave He power to become the sons of God’ (v. 12), like this: *‘How is power given them to become the sons of God, if there is no freedom of our will?’* This passage also is a hammer against ‘free-will’, as is almost the whole of John’s gospel; yet it too is cited in favour of ‘free-will’! Let us look at it, please! John is not speaking of any work of man, great or small, but of the actual renewal and transformation of the old man, who is a son of the devil, into the new man, who is a son of God. In this, man is simply *passive* (as the term is used); he *does* nothing, but the whole of him *becomes* something. John is speaking of this becoming: He says that we become the sons of God, by a power divinely given us—not by any power of ‘free-will’ inherent in us! Our friend the Diatribe, however, concludes from these words that ‘free-will’ has so much power that it makes us the sons of God; otherwise, it is ready to aver that John’s words are absurd and useless! But who ever so exalted ‘free-will’ as to credit it with the power of making the sons of God ?—especially a ‘free-will’ that cannot will good, such as the Diatribe has presupposed! This may be dismissed along with the rest of these oft-repeated inferences, which, if they prove anything, prove . just what the Diatribe denies—namely, that ‘free-will’ can do everything!

John means this: The coming of Christ into the world through the gospel, by which grace is offered without works being required, creates for all men the truly splendid opportunity of being sons of God, if they will believe. But this willing and believing on His name is something of which ‘free-will’ had no previous knowledge or conception—so much the less can it do it by its own strength! How could reason conceive that faith in Jesus as Son of God and Son of Man was necessary, when even at this day it can neither grasp nor believe, though the whole creation should cry aloud, that there is a person who is both God and man! Indeed, it rather finds offence in such a statement, as Paul tells us in 1 Cor. 1 (cf. vv. 17-31)—so impossible is it that it should be either willing or able to believe it! So John is preaching, not the virtues of ‘free-will,’ but the riches of the kingdom of God, which are offered to the world by the gospel; and at the same time he intimates how few there are that receive it, just because ‘free-will’ opposes it. The power of ‘free-will’ amounts to this: because Satan rules over it, it rejects even grace, and the Spirit Who fulfils the law—so excellently do its own ‘endeavour’ and ‘effort’ avail to fulfil the law!

We shall show more fully at a later stage what a thunderbolt this passage of John is against ‘free-will’. However, I am not a little astonished that the Diatribe should cite in favour of ‘free-will’ passages which are so clear, and so forcible against it. But its stupidity is such that it makes no distinction at all between the words of promise and of law; with supreme foolishness, it establishes ‘free-will’ from words of law, and confirms it, far more ludicrously still, by words of promise! But this absurdity is easily explained if account is taken of the proud and disaffected frame of mind in which the Diatribe disputes: it is not at all concerned whether grace stands or falls, whether ‘free-will’ lies vanquished or sits on the throne, if only it can oblige the tyrants by prejudicing our case with empty words!

After this we come to Paul, the most determined adversary of ‘free-will’; and even he is forced to set up ‘free-will’, in Rom. 2: Or despisest thou the riches of His goodness and patience and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?’ (v. 4). *‘How can a charge of despising the commandment be brought,’* says the Diatribe, *‘where there is no free will? How does God invite to repentance, if He is the author of impenitence? How is condemnation just, when it is the judge who compels to evil-doing?’* I reply: The Diatribe may see to these questions itself. What are they to us? The Diatribe stated in that ‘probable view’ that ‘free-will’ cannot will good and is compelled of necessity to serve sin. How, then, can the despising of the commandment be charged upon it, if it cannot will good, and there is in it no freedom, but a necessary bondage to sin ? How does God invite it to repentance when He Himself prevents its repentance by abandoning it, or not giving grace to it, when it cannot will good of itself? How is condemnation just, when the Judge, by withdrawing His aid, compels the ungodly to be left in his wickedness, since of his own power he can do nothing else? All these questions recoil on the Diatribe’s own head; or else, if they prove anything, they prove, as I said, that ‘freewill’ can do all things, which the Diatribe and everybody else denies! Its own rational inferences trouble the Diatribe throughout all the statements of Scripture; for it seems to the Diatribe absurd and useless to enforce and exact in such peremptory words when there is nobody who can comply. But the design of the Apostle in these threatenings is to bring the proud and ungodly to knowledge of themselves and of their impotence, so that, having humbled them by the knowledge of their sin, he might prepare them for grace.

What need is there to review one by one all the passage cited from Paul ? For the Diatribe collects only imperative and conditional statements, or words in which Paul exhorts Christians to the fruits of faith; and then, by tacking on its inferences, it proceeds to envisage a‘free-will’ whose power is so great that it can without grace do all that Paul commands in his exhortations. Christians, however, are made to act, not by ‘free-will’, but by the Spirit of God, as Rom. 8 tells us (v. 14); and to be made to act is not to act, but to be impelled, as a saw or an axe is made to act by a carpenter.

Lest any should at this point doubt that Luther said such foolish things, the Diatribe recites his own words—which, indeed, I acknowledge; for I confess that Wycliffe’s tenet (‘all things come to pass by necessity’) was falsely condemned by the Council—or, rather, the Cabal and Conspiracy—of Constance. Indeed, the Diatribe itself maintains the same as I do when it asserts that ‘free-will’ by its own strength can will no good, and necessarily serves sin—even though it lays this down in the course of proving the exact opposite!

Suffice it to have said this much in reply to the first part of the Diatribe, where it sought to establish ‘free-will’. Now let us consider the later part, where it attempts to refute my arguments—those, that is, by which ‘free-will’ is abolished. Here you shall see what the smoke of man can do against the thunder and lightning of God!

---

### Notes

[^1]: vitiosam.
[^2]: Andabatae: gladiators whose helmets had no eyeholes and who therefore fought blind.
[^3]: Modernos: i.e. the exponents of the Nominalist via moderna.
[^4]: crasse enim dicendum est.
[^5]: Lombard, Sententiarum, lib. II dist. 25.5; Augustine, De Spiritu et Littera, 3.5.
[^6]: servum potius quam liberum arbitrium.
[^7]: i.e. Peter Lombard.
[^8]: per accidens.
[^9]: Hoc facietis forte ad Calendas graecas, i.e. never.
[^10]: verborum vertumnis.
[^11]: absolution velle.
[^12]: metuenda.
[^13]: in procliui esse.
[^14]: crasse.
[^15]: privates.
[^16]: optativa.
[^17]: gratuita.
[^18]: usque ad multam nauseam.
[^19]: rectissime.
