# VII. The Bible Doctrine of the Bondage of the Will (W.A. 756–786)

### (i) Rom. i.i8ff.: the universal guilt of mankind disproves free-will' (756-760)

We come now to the last part of this book, in which, as I promised, I am to bring into the field my own resources against ‘free-will’. Not that I shall bring them all; who could do that in this small book, when the entire Scripture, every jot and tittle of it, stands on my side ? And there is no need; for ‘free-will’ lies vanquished and prostrate already. Twice have I overthrown it: first, by proving that all that it thought made for it actually stands against it; then, by showing that the arguments which it sought to refute still continue impregnable. And, even were it as yet unconquered, no more need be done than to lay it low with a single stroke or two; for when with one weapon you have despatched your enemy, there is no need to go on hacking him with many more. We shall now, therefore, be briefer, if our subject will allow of it. Out of a host of armies, J shall bring into the fray two generals, with a few of their legions only—I mean, Paul and the evangelist John.

Paul, writing to the Romans, enters upon his argument for the grace of God against ‘free-will’ as follows: ‘The wrath of God’ (he says) ‘is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold down the truth in unrighteousness’ (Rom. 1.18). Do you hear this general judgment against all men, that they are under the wrath of God ? What does this mean, but that they merit wrath and punishment ? He assigns the reason for the wrath by saying that they do only that which merits wrath and punishment—that they are all ungodly and unrighteous, and hold down the truth in unrighteousness. Where now is the power of ‘free-will’ to endeavour after some good? Paul makes it merit the wrath of God, and pronounces it ungodly and unrighteous! And that which deserves wrath and is ungodly is endeavouring and availing, not for grace, but against it.

Here someone will smile at Luther’s sleepy-headedness in not studying Paul closely enough. He will say that Paul is here speaking, not of all men, nor of all their activities, but only of those that are ungodly and unrighteous and who, as his own words put it, ‘hold down the truth in unrighteousness’; and that it does not hence follow that all men are such.

On this I would comment that, in Paul, the words ‘against all ungodliness of men’ means the same as ‘against the ungodliness of all men’, because Paul almost everywhere uses Hebrew idiom. Thus the sense is: ‘all men are ungodly and unrighteous, and hold down the truth in unrighteousness; all, therefore, merit wrath.’ Furthermore, there is in the Greek no relative pronoun *(‘of those* who’), but an article, like this: ‘the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men-holding-down-the-truth-in-un-righteousness.’ So that this phrase stands as a description[^1] of all men, that they ‘hold down the truth in unrighteousness’; just as it is a description when it says, Our Father, which art in heaven’, which might be otherwise expressed thus: Our heavenly Father’, or: ‘Our Father in heaven’. The design of the words is to mark off those who believe and are godly.

This explanation of mine might seem frivolous and empty, did not Paul’s own argument require and evince it. A little before, he had said: ‘The gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth, to the Jew first and also to the Greek’ (v. 16). There are no obscure or ambiguous words here: the gospel of the power of God is necessary ‘to Jews and Greeks’, that is, to all men, that they may by believing be saved from the wrath revealed. Paul proclaims that the Jews, for all their mighty righteousness, knowledge of God’s law and power of ‘free-will’, differ not a whit from other men in their destitution and need of the power of God for salvation from the wrath revealed; he represents that power as necessary to them; does he not hereby adjudge them to be under wrath ? What men will you instance, now, as not being subject to the wrath of God, when you are compelled to believe that the noblest men in the world, that is, the Jews and the Greeks, were subject to it? Whom among the Jews and the Greeks themselves will you exempt, when Paul embraces them all without distinction in a single phrase, and passes on them all the same verdict? Must we suppose that out of those two outstanding nations there were none that aspired to uprightness? none that endeavoured with all the strength of ‘free-will’? Yet Paul does not hesitate to consign them all under wrath and proclaim them all ungodly and unrighteous. And must we not suppose that the other apostles, each in his own sphere, consigned all other nations under this wrath in similar terms?

This passage in Paul, therefore, stands strong in its insistence that even in the most excellent men, however endowed with law, righteousness, wisdom and all virtues, ‘free-will’, their most excellent part, is nonetheless ungodly, and unrighteous, and merits God’s wrath. Otherwise Paul’s argument is without force. But if it is a valid argument, then his division leaves no middle state; for by it he assigns salvation to those who believe the gospel and wrath to all the rest. He makes believers righteous, and unbelievers ungodly, unrighteous, and under wrath. He means just this: the righteousness of God is revealed in the gospel to be ‘from faith’; therefore, all men are ungodly and unrighteous. God would be foolish to reveal righteousness to men who knew it, or had the seeds of it, already; since He is not foolish, and yet does reveal to them the righteousness of salvation, it is apparent that ‘free-will’, even in the noblest men, not only does not possess and cannot effect anything, but does not even know what is righteous in God’s sight. Or may it be that the righteousness of God is not revealed to these noblest men, but to the most ignoble only ? But that is contradicted by Paul’s boast that he is debtor to Jews and to Greeks, to the wise and to the unwise, to the Greeks and to the barbarians. So in this passage Paul simply lumps all men together, and concludes them, one and all, to be ungodly, unrighteous, ignorant of righteousness and of faith; so impossible is it that they can will or do any good. And this conclusion is confirmed by the fact that God reveals the righteousness of salvation as to men who sit ignorantly in darkness; of themselves, therefore, they know nothing of it; and if they are ignorant of the righteousness of salvation, they are certainly under wrath and condemnation, and by reason of their ignorance they cannot thence extricate themselves, nor endeavour so to do. How can you endeavour, if you do not know what, or how, or why, or to what extent, you must endeavour ?

The facts of experience support this conclusion. Show me out of the whole race of mortal men one, albeit the most holy and righteous of them all, to whose mind it ever occurred that the way to righteousness and salvation was simply to believe on Him who is both God and man, who died for men’s sins, and was raised, and is set at the right hand of the Father! Show me one who dreamed of this wrath of God which Paul here says is revealed from heaven! Look at the greatest philosophers! What thoughts had they of God? What have they left in writing about the wrath to come? Look at the Jews, incessantly instructed by a host of signs and prophets; what did they think of this Way? Not only did they not receive it, but they so hated it that no nation under heaven has persecuted Christ more bitterly to this day. Yet who would dare to say that amid so great a people there was not one who exercised ‘free-will’ and made endeavour with all its power ? How is it, then, that they all endeavour the opposite way, and that that which was the most excellent part of the most excellent men not only did not follow this method of righteousness, not only was ignorant of it, but when it was revealed and proclaimed to them, thrust it away with the greatest hate and wished for its ruin? So much so that in 1 Cor. 1 (v. 23) Paul speaks of that Way as being ‘to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Gentiles[^1] foolishness.’ Since he speaks of Jews and Gentiles[^2] as on the same footing, and since it is certain that Jews and Gentiles[^1] constitute the chief peoples under heaven, it is also certain that ‘free-will’ is nothing but the greatest enemy of righteousness and man’s salvation. There must have been some among the Jews and the Gentiles who wrought and endeavoured with all the power of ‘free-will’; and yet by that very endeavouring they merely waged war against grace.

Now come and tell us that ‘free-will’ endeavours towards good, when goodness and righteousness themselves are a stumbling-block and foolishness to it! Neither can you say that this applies to some, but not all. Paul speaks of all as on the same footing when he says: ‘to the Jews a stumbling-block and to the Gentiles foolishness,’ and he excepts none but believers. ‘To us,’ he says, that is, ‘who are called,’ and saints, ‘it is the power and wisdom of God’ (vv. 18, 24). He does not say: to some Gentiles and to some Jews, but simply: to Gentiles and Jews who are not of us. He separates believers from unbelievers by a clear division, leaving no middle state. We are discussing Gentiles who work without grace; and Paul is saying that to them the righteousness of God is foolishness which they abhor. And this is your *‘praiseworthy endeavour of “free-will” towards good’!*

Furthermore: see whether Paul himself does not specifically instance the noblest among the Greeks when he says that the wiser ones among them ‘became fools, and their heart was darkened’, and that ‘they became vain in their own reasonings’[^3]—that is, by their own subtle disputations (Rom. 1.21). Does he not here, pray, touch on the noblest and most excellent thing in the Greeks, when he touches on their reasonings? These were their finest and best thoughts and opinions, which they took for solid wisdom. But, as elsewhere he calls this wisdom that was in them ‘foolish’, so here he says it was ‘vain’, and by its many endeavours grew worse, till at last with darkened hearts they worshipped idols and committed consequent enormities, which he goes on to mention. If, now, the best effort and performance of the best of the Gentiles is evil and ungodly, what do you think of the rest of men, the inferior Gentiles, as it were ? And here Paul makes no distinction among the best of them, but condemns their pursuit of wisdom without respect of persons. But if the actual performance and effort is condemned, then all who made that effort, though they did so with all the power of ‘free-will’ are condemned too. Their very best endeavour, I repeat, is declared defective; how much more, then, they that were exercised in it ?

In the same way, making no difference, he goes straight on to reject those Jews who are Jews in the letter but not in the Spirit. ‘Thou by the letter and circumcision dishonourest God,’ he says (Rom. 2.23, 27). Again: ‘He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, but he who is a Jew inwardly’ (vv. 28-29). What can be clearer than this division? The Jew outwardly is a transgressor of the law. How many Jews do you think there were without faith who were yet most wise, most religious and most upright persons, and aspired after righteousness and truth with the highest endeavour ? The apostle often bears record of them that ‘they have a zeal of God’, ‘they follow after the righteousness of the law’, ‘day and night they strive to come to salvation’, they live ‘blameless’ (Rom. 10.2, 9.31; Acts 26.7; Phil. 3.6). Nonetheless, they are transgressors of the law, because they are not Jews in spirit, and, indeed, obstinately resist the righteousness of faith. What conclusion remains, then, but that ‘free-will’, when at its best, is then at its worst, and the more it endeavours the worse it grows and is ? The words are plain; the division is clear-cut; nothing can be said against it.

### (ii) Rom. 3-9ff., 19ff: the universal dominion of sin disproves freewill’ (760-764)

But let us hear Paul interpret himself. In the third chapter, by way of peroration, he says: ‘What then? are we better than they? In no wise; for we have proved both Jews and Gentiles to be all under sin’ (v. 9). Where is ‘free-will’ now? All Jews and Greeks, he says, are under sin! Are there any ‘figures’ or ‘knots’ here? What can the whole world’s ‘explanation’ avail against this perfectly clear statement ? By saying ‘all’ he excepts none. By describing them all as ‘under sin’, that is, slaves of sin, he leaves them no goodness. Where did he give this proof that all Jews and Gentiles are under sin? Precisely where I called attention to it, that is, where he says: ‘The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.’ He there proceeds to prove from experience that men were unthankful to God and enslaved to a host of vices and are, as it were, forced by the fruits of their own ungodliness to admit that they will and do nothing but evil. Then he judges the Jews separately, saying that the Jew in the letter is a transgressor of the law, and proving it in a similar way from the fruits of experience, thus: ‘Thou that preachest a man should not steal stealest thyself; thou that abhorrest idols dost commit sacrilege’ (Rom. 2.21-22); and he exempts none at all but those who are Jews in spirit. You cannot find a way out by saying: though they are under sin, yet the best part in them, that is, reason and will, makes endeavours towards good. For if the endeavour that remains to them is good, Paul’s statement that they are under sin is false. When he names Jews and Gentiles’, he includes all that is in Jews and Gentiles—-unless you are going to turn Paul upside down and make out that what he wrote means this: ‘the flesh of all Jews and Gentiles, that is, their grosser affections, are under sin.’ But wrath is revealed from heaven against them, and unless they are justified by the Spirit it will damn them, whole and entire; which would not be, were they not under sin, whole and entire!

Let us see how Paul proves his view from the Holy Scriptures, and whether ‘words have more force in Paul than in their own place’! ‘Thus it is written,’ he says: ‘there is none righteous, there is none that understandeth, none that seeketh after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are all together become unprofitable, there is none that doeth good, no, not one,’ etc. (Rom. 3.10-12). Here let him that can give me a ‘convenient explanation’, or invent ‘figures’, or contend that the words are ambiguous and obscure! Let him that dares defend ‘free-will’ against these indictments, and I will gladly give way and recant, and be a confessor and assertor of ‘free-will’ myself! It is certain that these words apply to all men, for the prophet introduces God as looking down from heaven upon all men and pronouncing this sentence upon them. That is how he puts it in Psalm 13: ‘God looked down from heaven upon the children of men to see if there were any that did understand or seek after God. But they are all gone out of the way,’ etc. (Ps. 14.2-3). Lest the Jews should think that this did not apply to them, Paul anticipates them by asserting that it applies to them most of all: ‘We know,’ he says, ‘that what things soever the law saith, it says to them that are under the law’ (v. 19). That was what he meant when he said: ‘To the Jew first, and also to the Greek’. You hear, then, that all the children of men, all that are under the law, that is, Gentiles as well as Jews, are accounted before God to be unrighteous, not understanding, not seeking after God, no, not one of them; they all go out of the way and are unprofitable. And I think that among the children of men, and those that are under the law, are numbered the ‘best and most upright’, who endeavour after what is upright and good with all the power of ‘free-will’, and of whom the Diatribe boasts as having the knowledge and seeds of uprightness implanted in them! (Or perhaps it would claim that such are the children of angels?)

How then are endeavours after good made by those who one and all are ignorant of God, and neither regard nor seek God ? How have they a power that is profitable for good, when they all go out of the way from good, and are utterly unprofitable ? Do we not know what it means to be ignorant of God, not to understand, not to seek God, not to fear God, to go out of the way and to be unprofitable ? Are not the words perfectly clear ? and do they not teach that all men are ignorant of God and despise God, and moreover go out of the way after evil, and are unprofitable for good ? Paul is not here speaking of ignorance in seeking food, or of contempt for money, but of ignorance and contempt of religion and godliness. And doubtless that ignorance and contempt are not seated in the flesh, in the sense of the lower and grosser affections, but in the highest and most excellent powers of man, in which righteousness, godliness, and knowledge and reverence of God, should reign—that is, in reason and will, and so in the very power of ‘free-will’, in the very seed of uprightness, the most excellent thing in man!

Where are you now, my good Diatribe ? You promised earlier that you would freely acknowledge that the most excellent thing in man is ‘flesh’ (that is, ungodly), if this were proved by the Scriptures! Acknowledge it now, then, as you hear that the most excellent thing in all men is not only ungodly, but ignorant of God, scornful of God, turned to evil, and unprofitable for good! What is it to be unrighteous, if not for the will (which is one of man’s most excellent parts) to be unrighteous ? What is it not to understand God and good, if not for the reason (which is another of man’s most excellent parts) to be ignorant of God and good, that is, blind to the knowledge of godliness ? What is it to go out of the way and be unprofitable, if not for men to have no power for good in any part of themselves, least of all in their most excellent parts, but only power to do evil ? What is it not to fear God, if not for men to despise God with all their faculties, and with their noblest most of all? And to despise God is to despise all the things of God, His words, works, laws, precepts and will! What, now, can reason propose that is right, when it is thus blind and ignorant ? What can the will choose that is good, when it is thus evil and unprofitable ? or, rather, what can the will pursue, when reason can propose to it nothing but the darkness of its own blindness and ignorance ? Where reason is in error and the will turned away, what good can man attempt or perform ?

Perhaps some bold spirit will here play the Sophist and say: though the will goes out of the way and reason does not know how to act, yet the will is able to make some endeavour, and reason to acquire some knowledge, by its own strength; for we are able to do much that in fact we do not do; and it is, of course, the degree of potency, and not its act, that concerns us.[^4]

I reply: The words of the prophet cover both the act and potency. To say: man does not seek God, is the same as saying: man cannot seek God, as you may hence gather: If there were potency or power in man to will good, the movement of Divine omnipotence would not suffer it to remain inactive or keep holiday, as I explained above, and it could not but be moved to action in some men, or at least in some individual man, and be exhibited in some employment. But this does not happen; for God looks down from heaven, and does not see even one who attempts to seek after Him. Whence it follows that power to attempt or purpose to seek after him is nowhere to be found; but all men instead go out of the way. Moreover, if Paul were not understood to affirm lack of potency, his argument would be without force; for Paul’s whole aim is to make grace necessary to all men, and if they could initiate something by themselves, they would not need grace. As it is, however, they need grace, just because they cannot do this. So you see that by the terms of this passage ‘free-will’ is utterly laid low, and nothing good or upright is left to man; for he is declared to be unrighteous, ignorant of God, a despiser of God, turned away from Him and unprofitable in His sight. And the prophet’s words have force enough in their own place, as well as in Paul’s quotation of them! It is no small thing when man is said to be ignorant of God and to despise Him; for this is the fountain-head of all iniquities, the sink of sins, yes, a hell of evil! What evil is not present where there is ignorance and contempt of God? In short, the rule of Satan over men could not be depicted in fewer yet fuller words than by saying that they are ignorant of, and despise, God! Here is unbelief, disobedience, sacrilege, blasphemy towards God, cruelty and mercilessness towards one’s neighbour, and love of self in all the things of God and of man! Here you have the glory and potency of ‘free-will’!

Paul now proceeds to put on record that he is speaking of every man, and of the best and most excellent men most of all. These are his words: ‘that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God; for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in His sight’ (Rom. 3.19-20).

How, pray, are all mouths stopped, if a power that gives us a degree of ability is left to us ? One could then say to God: it is not the case that there is nothing at all here; here is something which You cannot condemn, seeing that You have given it a degree of ability. Its mouth at least will not be silenced, nor will it be subject to Your wrath. For if the power of ‘free-will’ is unimpaired and capable of effective action, it is false to say the whole world is guilty and answerable before God. This power is no small thing in a small corner of the world, but is the most excellent thing and the most universal; and its mouth must not be stopped! If its mouth ought to be stopped, then it ought to take its place with ‘all the world’ as guilty, and answer-able before God. But by what right can it be called guilty, if it is not unrighteous and ungodly, that is, meriting punishment and vengeance? I should like to see the ‘explanation’ by which this power in man may be cleared of the guilt that is binding upon all the world before God, or the artifice by which it may be exempted from inclusion in ‘all the world’! Paul’s words: ‘They are all gone out of the way; all the world is guilty; there is none righteous’, are awful thunderclaps and piercing thunderbolts; they are in truth what Jeremiah calls ‘the hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces’ (cf. Jer. 23.29). They break in pieces not only all that is in one man, or in some men, or in some part of them, but all that is in the whole world, in every man without any exception; so that the whole world should tremble, and fear, and flee at these words. For what mightier or more awful utterances could there be than these: ‘all the world is guilty, all the children of men are turned away and unprofitable; there is none that fears God; there is none that is not unrighteous; none understandeth; none seeketh after God’? Nevertheless, such was and is the hardness and senseless obstinacy of our hearts that we do not hear nor feel the force of these thunderclaps and thunderbolts, but exalt and set up ‘free-will’ and its powers in the face of them all. Thus we have in truth fulfilled the words of the first chapter of Malachi: ‘They build, but I will throw down!’ (v. 4). With the same majesty of utterance it is also said: ‘By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight’ (Rom. 3.20). ‘By the deeds of the law’ is a mighty phrase, as is: ‘all the world’ and: ‘all the children of men.’ For it should be observed that Paul avoids naming persons and mentions men’s pursuits only, intending thus to include all persons and all that is most excellent in them. Had he said, *the Jewish people,* or *the Pharisees,* or *certain ungodly persons,* are not justified, he might have appeared to be leaving out some who by the power of ‘free-will,’ and by the help of the law, were not altogether unprofitable. But when he condemns the very works of the law, and makes them ungodly in God’s sight, it becomes clear that he is condemning all that were mighty in zeal for the works of the law. And none were zealous for the works of the law but the best and most excellent men, and that only with their best and most excellent faculties, that is, their reason and their will. If, then, those who exercised themselves in the works of the law with the highest zeal and endeavour of reason and will, that is, with all the power of ‘free-will,’ and had the help of the law as a God-given aid, instructing and spurring them on—if *they* are condemned for ungodliness, as not being hereby justified, and are declared to be ‘flesh’ in God’s sight, what then is left in the entire human race which is not ‘flesh’ and ungodly? For all who are of the works of the law are condemned alike. It makes no difference whether they exercised themselves in the law with the highest zeal, or with lukewarm zeal, or with none at all. They all could perform only works of the law; and works of the law do not justify; and if they do not justify, they prove those who work them to be ungodly, and leave them so; and the ungodly are guilty, and merit the wrath of God! These things are so clear that none can whisper a word against them.

### (iii) That the ‘works’ which justify are not merely ceremonial works (764-766)

Paul’s meaning is commonly escaped and avoided by saying that what he calls ‘works of the law’ are ceremonial works, which since the death of Christ are death-dealing. I reply: This is the error of ignorant Jerome, which, for all Augustine’s strenuous resistance, spread throughout the world when God withdrew, and Satan prevailed, and has continued to this day; with the result that it has been impossible to understand Paul, and the knowledge of Christ has been inevitably obscured. Had there been no other error in the church, this one was sufficiently potent and destructive to wreck the gospel. Unless extraordinary grace has interposed, Jerome deserved hell rather than heaven for it—so far am I from having the audacity to canonise him and call him a saint! It is not true that Paul is here speaking only of ceremonial works; else, how will his argument to prove that all are unrighteous and need grace, stand good? For one could then say: Granted, we are not justified by ceremonial works; but a man can be justified by the moral works of the Decalogue. So your syllogism has not proved that grace is necessary to all men. And how profitable, in that case, grace would be, delivering us merely from ceremonial works, which are the easiest works of all, and can be screwed out of us by plain fear or self-love!

Moreover, it is erroneous to say that ceremonial works are deadly and unlawful since the death of Christ. Paul never said that. What he says is that they do not justify, or in any way help man to free himself from ungodliness in God’s sight. It is fully compatible with this that one can do them without doing anything unlawful. Eating and drinking are works which do not justify or commend us to God, yet he who eats and drinks does not therefore do something unlawful.

And there is a further error here: Ceremonial works were as much commanded and made obligatory in the old law as was the Decalogue; therefore, the latter had neither more nor less force than the former. Paul speaks to the Jews first, as he says in Rom. I (v. 16); so none need doubt that by ‘the works of the law’ all the works of the entire law are meant. Indeed, they could not be called ‘the works of the law’ if the law was abrogated and death-dealing, for an abrogated law is law no more, as Paul well knew. When he speaks of ‘the works of the law’, therefore, he is speaking, not of a law that is abrogated, but of a law that is in force and authoritative. Otherwise, how easily he might have said: ‘The law itself is now abrogated!’—which would have been a plain, clear statement of the case. But let us appeal to Paul himself, his own best interpreter. In Gal. 3, he says: ‘As many as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is everyone that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do them’ (v. 10). Paul is here urging the same point as in Romans, and in the same words; and you see that when he makes mention of the works of the law he speaks of all the laws that are written in the book of the law. Moreover—what is still more remarkable —Paul cites Moses as cursing those who continue not in the law, whereas he himself pronounces accursed those who are of the works of the law; thus adducing a passage with a different scope from his own expressed view, the former being negative and the latter affirmative. This he does, however, because the real position in the sight of God is that those who are most zealous in the works of the law are furthest from fulfilling the law; for they are without the Spirit, Who alone fulfils the law. Men may try to keep it in their own strength, but they can accomplish nothing. Thus, both statements are true—that of Moses, that they are accursed who ‘continue not’, and that of Paul, that they are accursed who ‘are of the works of the law’. Both speakers require that men should have the Spirit, without Whom works of law, however many are done, do not justify, as Paul says; so that men do not continue in all things that are written, as Moses says.

In a word: Paul fully confirms what I say by his division. He divides workers at the law into two classes, those who work after the Spirit and those who work after the flesh, leaving no middle state. He says: ‘By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified.’ What is this, but to say that when men work at the law without the Spirit, being themselves flesh, that is, ungodly and ignorant of God, their works profit them nothing? In Gal. 3, he makes use of the same division when he says: ‘Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?’ (v. 2). Again, in Rom. 3 he says: ‘But now the righteousness of God has been revealed without the law’; and again: ‘We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law’ (vv. 21, 28). From all these passages it is clear and plain that in Paul the Spirit is set in opposition to the works of the law, as He is to all other things that are not spiritual, and to all the powers and qualities of the flesh. So it is certain that Paul’s view here accords with Christ’s teaching in John 3 (v. 6), that everything which is not of the Spirit is flesh, however specious, holy and excellent it may be, even the most glorious works of God’s law, by whatever powers wrought. For the Spirit of Christ is needed, and without Him all is nothing but a matter for condemnation.

Let it be settled, then, that Paul by ‘the works of the law’ means, not ceremonial works, but all the works of all the law. Then it will also be settled that all works of law that are wrought without the Spirit are condemned. But the power of ‘free-will’ (which is the matter in dispute), though no doubt the most excellent thing in man, is without the Spirit. That he is ‘of the works of the law’ is the finest thing that can be said of a man. But Paul does not say, ‘who are of sins, and of ungodliness, contrary to the law’; he says, ‘who are of the works of the law’— that is, the best devotees of the law, who, over and above the power of ‘free-will’, are also aided—that is, instructed and encouraged—by the law itself. If, now, ‘free-will,’ when aided by the law, and occupied in the law with all its powers, profits nothing and fails to justify, but is left in ungodliness in the flesh, what must we think it could do on its own, without the law? ‘By the law is the knowledge of sin,’ says Paul (Rom. 3.20). Here he shows how much and how far the law profits, teaching that ‘free-will’ is of itself so blind that it does not even know what sin is, but needs the law to teach it! And what can a man essay to do in order to take away sin, when he does not know what sin is? Surely this: mistake what is sin for what is not sin, and what is not sin for what is sin! Experience informs us clearly enough how the world, in the persons of those whom it accounts its best and most zealous devotees of righteousness and godliness, hates and hounds down the righteousness of God preached in the gospel, and brands it heresy, error, and other opprobrious names, while flaunting and hawking its own works and devices (which are really sin and error) as righteousness and wisdom. By these words, therefore, Paul stops the mouth of ‘free-will’, teaching that by the law it is shown sin, as being ignorant of its sin; so far is he from allowing it any power to make endeavours towards good.

### (iv) That the law is designed to lead to Christ by giving knowledge of sin (766-767)

And here is the solution of the question which the Diatribe repeats so often all through the book: *‘if we can do nothing, what is the purpose of all the laws, precepts, threats and promises?’* Paul here gives the answer: ‘by the law is the knowledge of sin.’ His answer to the question is far different from the ideas of man, or of ‘free-will’. He does not say that ‘free-will’ is proved by the law, nor that it co-operates unto righteousness; for by the law comes, not righteousness, but knowledge of sin. This is the fruit, the work, the office of the law; it is a light to the ignorant and blind, but one that displays disease, sin, evil, death, hell and the wrath of God. It does not help nor set them free from these things; it is content merely to point them out. When a man discovers the sickness of sin, he is cast down and afflicted; nay, he despairs. The law does not help him; much less can he heal himself. Another light is needed to reveal a remedy. This is the voice of the gospel, which displays Christ as the Deliverer from all these evil things. But neither reason nor ‘free-will’ points to Him; how could reason point to Him, when it is itself darkness and needs the light of the law to show it its own sickness, which by its own light it fails to see, and thinks is sound health ?

So too in Galatians, dealing with the same point. Paul asks: ‘Wherefore then serveth the law?’ (3.19). He does not answer, as the Diatribe does, that it proves the existence of ‘free-will’, but says ‘it was added because of transgressions, until the seed should come to whom He had made promise.’ ‘Because of transgressions,’ he says; not, indeed, to restrain them, as Jerome dreams, for Paul is arguing that the removing and restraining of sins by the gift of righteousness was promised to the seed that was to come; but to increase transgressions, as he says in Rom. 5: ‘The law entered, that sin might abound’ (v. 20). But that sins were not committed in abundance without the law; but then they were not known to be transgressions and sins of such awful import, and the most and greatest of them were held to be righteousness! As long as sins are unknown, there is no room for a cure, and no hope of one; for sins that think they betoken health and need no physician will not endure the healer’s hand. The law is therefore necessary to give knowledge of sin, so that proud man, who thought he was whole, may be humbled by the discovery of his own great wickedness, and sigh and pant after the grace that is set forth in Christ.

See, then, how simple the statement is: ‘By the law is the knowledge of sin.’ Yet this text alone has power enough to confound and overthrow ‘free-will’. For if it is true that ‘freewill’ of itself does not know what sin and evil are, as the apostle says here and in Rom. 7 (T had not known that covetousness was sin, except the law had said, “Thou shalt not covet” ’ [vv. 7, 8]), how can it ever know what righteousness and good are ? And if it is ignorant of righteousness, how can it endeavour to attain it? We do not know the sin in which we were born, in which we live, and move, and have our being, and which, moreover, lives, moves and reigns in us; how then should we know that righteousness which reigns outside us in heaven? Paul’s words make this wretched ‘free-will’ to be utterly and completely non-existent!

### (v) Rom. 3.21-26: the doctrine of salvation by faith in Christ disproves ‘free-will’ (767-769)

This being so, Paul now proclaims with full confidence and weight of authority: ‘But now the righteousness of God without the law, is manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe in Him: for there is no difference, for all have sinned and are without the glory of God; being justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in His blood,’ etc. (Rom. 3.21-5). Here Paul utters very thunderbolts against ‘free-will’. First: ‘The righteousness of God without the law,’ he says, ‘is manifested.’ He distinguishes the righteousness of God from the righteousness of the law; because the righteousness of faith comes by grace, without the law. His phrase ‘without the law’ can mean only that Christian righteousness exists without the works of the law, the works of the law availing and effecting nothing towards its attainment. So he says, just below: ‘We concluded that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law’ (v. 28). Earlier, he had said: ‘By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in His sight’ (v. 20). From all this it is very plain that the endeavour and effort of ‘free-will’ are simply null; for if the righteousness of God exists without the law, and without the works of the law, how shall it not much more exist without ‘free-will’ ? For the supreme concern of ‘free-will’ is to exercise itself in moral righteousness, the works of that law by which its blindness and impotence are ‘assisted’,. But this word ‘without’ does away with morally good works, and moral righteousness, and preparations for grace. Imagine any power you can think of as belonging to ‘free-will’, and Paul will still stand firm and say: ‘the righteousness of God exists without it!’ And though I should grant that ‘free-will’ by its endeavours can advance in some direction, namely, in the direction of good works, or the righteousness of the civil or moral law, yet it does not advance towards God’s righteousness, nor does God deem its efforts in any respect worthy to gain His righteousness; for He says that His righteousness stands without the law. And if ‘free-will’ does not advance towards God’s righteousness, what will it gain even if by its works and endeavours it advances towards angelic holiness ?—if that were possible. I do not think there are any obscure and ambiguous words here, nor that room is left here *for* any figures of speech. Paul clearly distinguishes the two righteousnesses, assigning the one to the law and the other to grace; and he declares that the latter is given without the former and without its works, and that the former without the latter does not justify or avail anything. I should like to see how ‘free-will’ can stand and be defended against these texts!

Another thunderbolt is Paul’s statement that the righteousness of God is manifested and avails ‘unto all and upon all them that believe’ in Christ, and that ‘there is no difference’. Here again in the plainest words he divides the whole human race into two. To believers he gives the righteousness of God; to unbelievers he denies it. Now, nobody is fool enough to doubt that the power and endeavour of ‘free-will’ is something distinct from faith in Jesus Christ! But Paul denies that anything apart from this faith is righteous before God. And if it is not righteous before God, it must be sin; for with God there remains nothing intermediate[^5] between righteousness and sin that is, as it were, neutral, being neither righteousness nor sin. Otherwise, Paul’s entire argument would be wholly ineffective, for its starting-point is just this dichotomy—all that is wrought and done among men is either righteousness or sin in God’s sight: righteousness, if faith is with it; sin, if faith is lacking. With men, indeed, it is the case that actions in which men who owe nothing to each other confer nothing on each other are called ‘intermediate’ and ‘neutral’. But the ungodly man sins against God, whether he eats, or drinks, or whatever he does, because he abuses God’s creation by his ungodliness and persistent ingratitude, and does not from his heart give glory to God for a single moment.

This statement is also a mighty thunderbolt: ‘All have sinned and are without the glory of God: for there is no difference.’ What, pray, could be more plainly said? Produce a man who works by ‘free-will’, and tell me whether he sins in his endeavours. If he does not sin, why does Paul not exempt him? Surely, he says ‘all’ does not exempt any, in any place, at any time, in any work, in any effort ? So if you except anyone for any design or work, you make Paul a liar; for in all that Paul says he includes this man, who works and endeavours by ‘free-will’, among the ‘all’, when he should have respected his person and not numbered him among sinners in such a blithe and sweeping style!

His statement, that all are ‘devoid of the glory of God’, teaches the same truth. You can take ‘the glory of God’ here in two ways, actively and passively. This is Paul’s manner in the Hebraisms which he often employs. Actively, ‘the glory of God’ is that by which He glories in us; passively, it is that by which we glory in God. It seems to me that the phrase should here be taken passively; just as ‘the faith of Christ’, which in Latin idiom would denote ‘faith which Christ has’, means, according to Hebrew idiom, ‘faith which we have in Christ’, and ‘the righteousness of God’, which in Latin idiom would denote a righteousness which God has, means, according to Hebrew idiom, a righteousness which we have from God and in God’s sight. Similarly, we take ‘the glory of God’, not in the Latin, but in the Hebrew way, as meaning the glory which we have in God and before God; which could be called, our glory in God.

Now, he who glories in God is he who knows for sure that God looks on him with favour, and deigns to regard him kindly, so that what he does is pleasing in God’s sight, and what does not please God is borne with and pardoned. If, now, the endeavour and effort of‘free-will’ is not sin, but is good in God’s sight, it can certainly glory, and in its glorying confidently say: this pleases God, God looks with favour on this, this God deigns to accept, or at any rate He bears with it and pardons it. This is the glory of those who have faith in God. To those that are without it belongs confusion of face, rather than glory, in God’s presence. But Paul here says that men are wholly devoid of this glory. And experience proves that they are. Inquire of all the ‘free-will’-endeavourers throughout the world, and if you can show me one who, seriously and from his heart, can say of any of his efforts and endeavours: ‘I know that this pleases God,’ I will confess defeat, and yield you the palm. But I know that none will be found. And if this glory is wanting, so that a man’s conscience dare not say with sure confidence: ‘this pleases God,’ it is certain that he does not please God! For as he believes, so is he; he does not believe that he undoubtedly pleases God, but it is necessary that he should; for it is precisely the sin of unbelief to doubt of the favour of God, inasmuch as God would have His favour believed in with the fullest certainty of faith. Thus I prove, on the testimony of their own consciences, that ‘free-will’, being without the glory of God, is, with all its powers, efforts and endeavours, perpetually guilty of the sin of unbelief.

### (vi) That the Pelagian doctrine of merit is less vicious than that of the Scholastics and Erasmus (769-771)

And what will the guardians of ‘free-will’ say to what follows: ‘being justified freely by His grace’ ? What does ‘freely’ mean? What does ‘by His grace’ mean? How will endeavour, and merit, accord with freely given righteousness ? Perhaps they will here say that they assign to ‘free-will’ as little as possible, not by any means condign merit.[^6] But these are empty words; for what is being sought by means of ‘free-will’ is that merit may have its place. The Diatribe itself argued and expostulated throughout in this strain: *‘If there is no freedom of will, what place is therefor merit? If there is no place for merit, what place is there for reward? To what will it be ascribed, if man is justified without merit?’* Paul here gives the answer—there is no such thing as merit at all, but all that are justified are justified freely, and this is ascribed to nothing but the grace of God. And when righteousness is given, then the kingdom and eternal life are given with it. Where is your endeavour now? and your effort? and your good works ? and the merits of ‘free-will’ ? What use are they ? You cannot plead obscurity and ambiguity; the matter and the words are as plain and simple as can be. Granted that your friends assign to ‘free-will’ ‘as little as possible’, nonetheless they teach us that by that little we can attain righteousness and grace: and they solve the problem as to why God justifies one and abandons another simply by presupposing ‘free-will’, and saying: ‘The one endeavoured and the other did not; and God regards the one for his endeavour and despises the other; and He would be unjust were He to do anything else!’ Though in what they say and write they profess that they do not attain grace to condign merit, nor call the merit in question ‘condign’, they are only trying to fool us by a word, for they hold the thing none the less. What can excuse their not calling it condign merit, when they assign to it all that pertains to condign merit? saying that he who endeavours finds grace in the sight of God, whereas he who does not endeavour does not find it? Is this not clearly a description of condign merit ? Do they not make God a respecter of works, merits, and persons, when they say that one man is without grace by his own fault, because he did not endeavour, whereas another, because he endeavours, obtains grace which he would not have obtained had he not endeavoured ? If this is not condign merit, I should like to be told what condign merit may be said to be! You could play on any word like this; you could say: ‘It is not indeed, condign merit, but has the same effect as condign merit’; ‘the thorn is not a bad tree, but has just the same effect as a bad tree’; ‘the fig-tree is not a good tree, but has the same effect as a good tree’; ‘the Diatribe is not, indeed, ungodly, but says and does just what the ungodly do’!

The guardians of ‘free-will’ have exemplified the saying: ‘out of the frying-pan, into the fire.’[^7]In their zeal to disagree with the Pelagians, they start denying condign merit, and by the very form of their denial they set it up more firmly! By word and pen they deny it, but really, in their hearts, they establish it, and are worse than the Pelagians upon two accounts. In the first place, the Pelagians confess and assert condign merit straightforwardly, candidly and honestly, calling a spade a spade[^8] and teaching what they really hold. But our friends here, who hold and teach the same view, try to fool us with lying words and false appearances, giving out that they disagree with the Pelagians, when there is nothing that they are further from doing! ‘Ifyou regard our pretences, we appear as the Pelagians’ bitterest foes; but if you regard the facts and our hearts, we are Pelagians double-dyed.’ Then, in the second place, this hypocrisy of theirs results in their valuing and seeking to purchase the grace of God at a much cheaper rate than the Pelagians. The latter assert that it is not by a feeble something within us that we obtain grace, but by efforts and works that are complete, entire, perfect, many and mighty; but our friends here tell us that it is by something very small, almost nothing, that we merit grace.

Now, if there must be error, those who say that the grace of God is priced high, and account it dear and costly, err less shamefully and presumptuously than those who teach that its price is a tiny trifle, and account it cheap and contemptible. Paul, however, pounds both errors to a single pulp with one word when he says that all are justified freely, without the law, and without the works of the law. The assertion that justification is free to all that are justified leaves none to work, merit or prepare themselves, and leaves no work that can be said to carry either congruent or condign merit. By the one cast of this thunderbolt, Paul shatters both the Pelagians with their total merit and the Sophists with their tiny merit. Free justification does not permit you to set men working for it, for free donation and preparation by working are manifestly incompatible. Furthermore, justification by grace does not permit you to regard the worthiness of any person, as Paul later says in the eleventh chapter: ‘If by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise, grace is not grace’ (v. 6). So, too, he says in the fourth chapter: ‘Now to him that worketh the reward is reckoned, not of grace, but of debt’ (v. 4). And so my good Paul, the scourge of‘free-will’, stands undefeated! He lays low two armies with a single word! For if we are justified without works, all works are condemned, whether small or great; Paul exempts none, but thunders impartially against all.

Now see here how sleepy-headed all our opponents are, and how little it helps a man to rely on the ancient fathers, for all their repute down the course of the ages! Were they not all equally blind to, yes, and heedless of, Paul’s clearest and plainest words ? What, pray, can be said for grace against ‘freewill’ clearly and plainly, if Paul’s discourse here is not clear and plain? He exalts grace against ‘free-will’ in categorical terms:[^9]using the clearest and simplest words, he says that we are justified freely, and that grace is not grace if procured by works.

With the greatest plainness he excludes all works in the matter of justification, and so sets up grace alone, and justification that is free. Yet in this light we still seek darkness, and because we cannot give ourselves great credit, yes, all the credit, for justification, we try to give ourselves some tiny little credit—solely in order that we may gain the point that justification by the grace of God is not free and without works! As though Paul’s denial that any of our greater works contributes to our justification were not much more a denial that our tiny little works do so! Especially when he has laid it down that we are justified only by God’s grace, without any works—indeed, without the law, in which all works, great, small, congruently or condignly meritorious, are contained. *Now go* and boast of the authority of the ancients and trust what they say—now that you see that they one and all disregarded the supremely plain and clear teaching of Paul! They fled from this morning star, yes, this sun, as if their lives depended on it; for they were in the grip of their own carnal ideas, and thought it absurd that no room should be left for merit.

### (vii) Rom. 4.2-3: the total irrelevance of works to man’s righteousness before God.

Let us cite the example that Paul goes on to cite, that of Abraham. He says: ‘If Abraham were justified by works he hath whereof to glory; but not before God. For what saith the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness’ (Rom. 4.2-3). Here, too, please take note of Paul’s distinction as he recounts Abraham’s twofold righteousness. The one is of works; that is, moral and civil. But Paul says that this did not justify Abraham in the sight of God, even though it made him righteous in the eyes of men. He has glory before men by reason of that righteousness, but is yet without the glory of God. None can say that it is the works of the law, or ceremonial works, that are here condemned, for Abraham lived many years before the law. Paul simply speaks of Abraham’s works, and those his best works; for it would be absurd to argue as to whether a man is justified by evil works. If, now, Abraham is righteous by none of his works, so that, unless he puts on another righteousness (that of faith), both he and all his works are left under the power of ungodliness, it is apparent that no man can make any advance towards righteousness by his works; and it is further apparent that no works, efforts or endeavours of ‘free-will’ are of any avail in God’s sight, but that they are all adjudged ungodly, unrighteous, and evil. For if a man himself is not righteous, neither are his works and endeavours righteous; and if they are not righteous, they merit damnation and wrath.

The other righteousness is that of faith, and consists, not in any works, but in the gracious favour and reckoning of God. See how Paul stresses the word ‘reckoned’; how he insists on it, and repeats it, and enforces it. ‘To him that worketh,’ he says, ‘the reward is *reckoned,* not of grace, but of debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is *reckoned* for righteousness,’ according to the purpose of God’s grace. Then he quotes David as saying the same about the reckoning of grace. ‘Blessed is the man to whom the Lord has not imputed sin,’ etc. (vv. 4ff). He repeats the word ‘reckon’ in this chapter about ten times.

In short, Paul sets ‘him that worketh’ and ‘him that worketh not’ side by side, and leaves none in the middle between them. He declares that righteousness is not reckoned to him that worketh, but is reckoned to him that worketh not, if only he believes. There is no way by which ‘free-will’, with its effort and endeavour, can dodge or escape; it must either be numbered with ‘him that worketh’, or with ‘him that worketh not’. If with ‘him that worketh’, you have heard Paul say that righteousness is not reckoned to it. If with ‘him that worketh not, but believeth’ on God, righteousness is reckoned to it. But then it will not be the power of ‘free-will’, but a new creation by faith. And if righteousness is not reckoned to ‘him that worketh’, it becomes clear that his works are nothing but sins, evil and ungodly in God’s sight.

No impudent Sophist can here object that, though man be evil, yet his work need not be evil. For Paul specifies not ‘man’ simply, but ‘him that worketh’, his intention being to declare in the plainest words that man’s actual works and efforts are condemned, whatever they are and by whatever name or appearance they go. It is of good works that he speaks, for he is arguing about justification and merit. And when he speaks of ‘him that worketh’, he speaks comprehensively of all who work and of all the works that they do, but especially of their good and upright works. Otherwise, his distinction between ‘him that worketh’ and ‘him that worketh not’ would not hold water.

### (viii) Of other arguments against free-will', not here developed (772-773)

I here pass by arguments of great strength drawn from the purpose of grace, from the promise, from the power of the law, from original sin, and from God’s election; every one of which by itself could utterly overthrow ‘free-will’, thus:

If the source of grace is the predestinating purpose of God, then it comes by necessity, and not by any effort or endeavour on our part, as I showed above.

Again: If God promised grace before the law, as Paul argues here and in Galatians, then it does not come by works or by law, else the promise would come to nothing; and faith also (by which Abraham was justified before the law was given) would come to nothing, should works avail.

Again: since the law is the strength of sin, displaying it without removing it, it makes the conscience guilty before God and threatens wrath. This is Paul’s meaning when he says: ‘the law worketh wrath’ (Rom. 4.15). How then could righteousness be procured by the law? And if we get no help from the law, how can we get help from the power of our will alone ?

Again: since by the single offence of the one man, Adam, we all lie under sin and condemnation, how can we set our hand to anything that is not sinful and damnable? When he says ‘all’, he excepts none; not the power of ‘free-will’, nor any worker, whether he works and endeavours or not; he is of necessity included with the rest among the ‘all’. Neither should we sin or be condemned by reason of the single offence of Adam, if that offence were not our own; who could be condemned for another’s offence, especially in the sight of God?

But his offence becomes ours; not by imitation, nor by any act on our part (for then it would not be the single offence of Adam, since we should have committed it, not he), but it becomes ours by birth. (We must, however, discuss this elsewhere.) Original sin itself, then, does not allow ‘free-will’ any power at all except to sin and incur condemnation.

These arguments, I repeat, I pass by; both because they are so very plain and powerful, and also because I have said something of them above. If, indeed, I wanted to review all the passages in Paul alone that overthrow ‘free-will’, I could do nothing better than give a running commentary on his entire writings, showing that the boasted power of‘free-will’ is refuted by almost every word—as I have done already in the case of these third and fourth chapters of Romans. I chose to deal with them particularly, because I wanted to show up the sleepy-headedness of all those friends of ours who read Paul in such a fashion that the last things they see in these perfectly plain passages are the mighty arguments against ‘free-will’ to which I have referred; and I wished also to expose the folly of their confidence in the authority and writings of the ancient doctors, and to leave them to think over what force the forementioned clear arguments would have, if handled with care and judgement.

### (ix) Of Paul’s cogency against free-will’ (773-774)

Speaking for myself, I am astounded that, when Paul so often uses these comprehensive terms, ‘all’, ‘none’, ‘not’, ‘never’, ‘without’, as in: ‘they are *all* gone out of the way, there is *none* righteous, *none* that doeth good, no, not one’; *‘all* are sinners condemned by the offence of one’; ‘we are justified by faith *without* the law, *without* works’ (so that he who would alter Paul’s language could not thereby increase the clarity and plainness of his speech)—I am amazed, I repeat, how it has happened that in face of these comprehensive terms and statements, others that are contrary, yes, contradictory to them should have won acceptance, such as: ‘Some are not gone out of the way, are not unrighteous, are not evil, are not sinners, are not condemned; there is something in man that is good and strives after good’; as though he who strives after good, whoever he may be, is not covered by the terms: ‘all’, ‘none’, and ‘not’! Personally, I could find nothing, even if I wished, to advance in reply against Paul, but would be forced to include the power of my own ‘free-will’, and its endeavour with it, among the ‘all’ and ‘none’ of which Paul speaks—unless we are to introduce a new grammar, and a new mode of speech! Had Paul used such an expression once, or in one place only, it might have been permissible to suspect a figure of speech and to isolate and strain the words. But as it is, he uses such expressions constantly, in both affirmative and negative sentences, and everywhere expresses his views by categorical statement and comprehensive contrast; so that not only the natural force of words and the actual flow of speech, but also that which comes before and after, the whole surrounding context, and the scope and contents of his entire argument, unite to prove what his meaning is: Paul intends to say that apart from faith in Christ there is nothing but sin and condemnation.

I promised to refute ‘free-will’ in such a way that none of my opponents would be able to resist, and this, I think, I have done; even if they will not own themselves beaten and come over to my view, or be silent. That, after all, it is not in my power to bring about; it is the gift of the Spirit of God.

### (x) Rom. 8.3: the state of man without the Spirit (774-775)

Before we hear the evangelist John, let me add a crowning testimony from Paul (and if this does not suffice, I am ready to marshal the whole of Paul against ‘free-will’ by means of a running commentary on all he wrote!). In Rom. 8, dividing the human race into two, ‘flesh’ and ‘spirit’, as Christ does in John 3 (v. 6), he says: ‘They that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, but they that are after the Spirit do mind the things of the Spirit’ (v. 5). That Paul here calls all ‘carnal’ that are not ‘spiritual’ is plain, both from the opposition of ‘spirit’ and ‘flesh’ in the division itself, and from Paul’s own next words: ‘But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his’ (v. 9). What is the meaning of: ‘Ye are not in the flesh, if the Spirit is in you,’ but those who have not the Spirit are of necessity in the flesh ? And he that is not Christ’s, whose else is he but Satan’s? It stands good then, that those who lack the Spirit are in the flesh, and under Satan.

Now let us see what Paul thinks about endeavour and the power of ‘free-will’ in carnal men. ‘They that are in the flesh cannot please God.’ Again: ‘The carnal mind is death.’ Again: ‘The carnal mind is enmity against God.’ Once more: ‘It is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be’ (vv. 5-8). Let the guardian of ‘free-will’ answer the following question: How can endeavours towards good be made by that which is death, and displeases God, and is enmity against God, and disobeys God, and cannot obey him ? Paul did not mean to say that the carnal mind is *dead,* and *at enmity* with God, but that it is *death itself* and *enmity itself,* which cannot possibly be subject to the law of God or please God; as he had said a little before (‘For what the law *could not do,* in that it was weak through the flesh, God did,’ etc. (v. 3)).

I, too, know of Origen’s fancy about the ‘threefold affection’, one called ‘flesh’, another ‘soul’, and the other ‘spirit’, the soul being in the middle between the other two, and able to turn either flesh-wards or spirit-wards. But these are just his own dreams; he retails them, but does not prove them. Paul here calls everything without the Spirit ‘flesh’, as I have shown. Therefore, the highest virtues of the best men are ‘in the flesh’; that is, they are dead, and at enmity with God, not subject to God’s law nor able to be so, and not pleasing God. Paul docs not say merely that they are not subject, but that they cannot be subject. So also Christ says in Matt. 7: ‘An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit’ (v. 18). And in Matt. 12: ‘How can ye, being evil, speak that which is good ?’ (v. 34). Here you see that not only do we speak evil, but we cannot speak good. And though He says elsewhere that we, though evil, know how to give good things to our children (cf. Matt. 7.11), yet He denies that we do good, even by our giving of good things, because the good things which we give are God’s creatures, and we, being evil, cannot give those good things in good fashion. He addresses this word to all men, even to His own disciples. So that this pair of statements by Paul, that ‘the righteous lives by faith’ (Rom. 1.17), and that ‘whatsoever is not of faith, is sin’ (Rom. 14.23), stand confirmed. The latter follows from the former; for if it is only by faith that we are justified, it is evident that they who are without faith are not yet justified; and those who are not justified are sinners; and sinners are evil trees, and can only sin and bear evil fruit. Wherefore, ‘free-will’ is nothing but the slave of sin, death and Satan, not doing anything, nor able to do or attempt anything, but evil!

### (xi) Rom. 10.20, 9.30-31: salvation by grace has no reference to previous endeavour (775-776)

Add to this the instance quoted in the tenth chapter of Romans from Isaiah: ‘I was found of them that sought me not, I manifested myself to them that asked not after me’ (v. 20; Isa. 65.1). Paul says this of the Gentiles—that it was given to them to hear and know Christ when previously they could not even think of Him, much less seek Him or prepare themselves for Him by the power of ‘free-will’. From this instance it is clear enough that grace comes so freely, that no thought of it, and certainly no endeavour or desire after it, precedes its coming. And take the case of Paul, when he was Saul—what did he do with all the power of his ‘free-will’ ? Certainly, if his state of mind be regarded, his heart was set on what was best and highest. But look at the endeavour whereby he found grace! Not only did he not seek grace, but he received it through his own mad fury against it!

Of the Jews, on the other hand, Paul says in chapter 9: ‘The Gentiles, which followed not after righteousness, have attained unto the righteousness which is by faith. But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained unto the law of righteousness’ (vv. 30-31). What word can any defender of ‘free-will’ breathe against this ? The Gentiles, when filled with ungodliness and every vice, receive righteousness freely by the mercy of God; the Jews, who follow after righteousness with the greatest effort and endeavour, do so in vain. Is not this just to say that the endeavours of ‘free-will’ after the highest are vain, and that by them it rather grows worse and is carried away backwards? None can say that the Jews’ efforts were not made with the highest power of ‘free-will’. Paul himself bears record of them in the tenth chapter, that ‘they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge’ (v. 2). So nothing that is assigned to ‘free-will’ was lacking to the Jews; yet nothing resulted—indeed, the reverse of what they sought resulted! In the Gentiles, nothing that is assigned to ‘free-will’ was present; yet for them the righteousness of God resulted. What is this but proof positive, by the very clear example of the two nations and the very plain testimony of Paul, that grace is given freely to the undeserving and utterly unworthy, and is not attained by any of the efforts, endeavours, or works, small or great, of even the best and most upright men who seek and follow after righteousness with flaming zeal ?

(xii) *John 1.5, 10-13, 16: salvation for a sinful world is by the grace of Christ through faith alone* (776-778)

Now let us come to John, who is also an eloquent and powerful scourge of ‘free-will’.

Right at the outset, he assigns to ‘free-will’ such blindness that it does not even see the light of truth, so far it is from being able to strive after it. He says: ‘The light shineth in darkness, but the darkness comprehendeth it not’ (John 1.5). And straight after: ‘He was in the world, and the world knew him not; He came unto his own, and his own knew him not’ (vv. 1 o-11). What do you think he means by ‘world’ ? Will you exempt any man from being so called, save him that is new created by the Holy Ghost? The use of this term, ‘world’, is characteristic of this Apostle; and by it he simply means, the whole human race. So whatever he says of the ‘world’ must be understood of ‘freewill’, as being the most excellent thing in man. According to this apostle, then, the ‘world’ does not know the light of truth; the ‘world’ hates Christ and His; the ‘world’ neither knows nor sees the Holy Spirit; the whole ‘world’ is set in wickedness; all that is in the ‘world’ is the lust of the flesh and of the eyes, and the pride of life. ‘Love not the world.’ ‘Ye are of the world’ says Christ; ‘the world cannot hate you, but me it hateth, because I testify that its works are evil’ (cf. John 15.19, 14.17; 1 John 5.19, 2.16, 2.15; John 8.23, 7.7). All these and many similar passages are proclamations of what ‘free-will’ is—the principal part of the ‘world’, ruling under Satan’s command! John himself speaks of the ‘world’ antithetically, so that the ‘world’ means whatever is not taken out of the world to be under the Spirit. Thus Christ says to his apostles: ‘I have taken you out of the world, and set you,’ etc. (John 15.19). If, now, there were any in the world who endeavoured after good by the power of ‘free-will’ (as there should be, if ‘free-will’ had any power), then, out of respect for them, John should have modified his statement, so as not, by generalising, to implicate them in all the evil deeds with which he charges the world. But this he does not do; from which it is clear that he is making ‘free-will’ guilty of all that is charged against the world. And his reason is, that the world does all that it does by the power of ‘free-will’, that is, by will and reason, its own most excellent parts.

He goes on: ‘But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: which were born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God’ (1.12-13). By this exhaustive division he rejects from the kingdom of Christ ‘blood’, ‘the will of the flesh’, and ‘the will of man’. ‘Blood’ means, I think, the Jews; that is, those who expected to be the children of the kingdom because they were the children of Abraham and the fathers, and so gloried in their ‘blood’. ‘The will of the flesh’ I understand as the efforts which the people exerted in the works of the law; for ‘flesh’ here means carnal men without the Spirit, who were certainly possessed of will and endeavour, but who, because the Spirit was not in them, possessed them in a carnal manner only. ‘The will of man’ I understand in a general sense, of the efforts of all men, that is, the nations, or any man whatsoever, whether in the law or without the law. So the sense is: the sons of God became such, not by carnal birth, nor by zeal for the law, nor by any other human effort, but only by being born of God. Now, if they are not born of the flesh, nor trained by the law, nor prepared by any human discipline, but are born again of God, it is apparent that ‘free-will’ avails nothing here. ‘Man’, I think, is used in the Hebrew way, to mean ‘any man’, or ‘all men’, just as ‘flesh’

is used antithetically to mean ‘people without the Spirit’. ‘Will’, I think, is used to denote the highest power in man— that is, the principal part, ‘free-will’. But even supposing that I do not hit the precise meaning of the individual words, the substance of the matter is still perfectly plain—that John by this division is rejecting everything that is not ‘born of God’; which, as he himself explains, is something that results from ‘believing on his name.’ ‘The will of man’, or ‘free-will’, which is neither new birth from God nor yet faith, is therefore necessarily included in this rejection. If ‘free-will’ could avail anything, John ought not to reject ‘the will of man’, nor should he draw men away from it and direct them to faith and new birth alone, lest the words of Isa. 5 should be pronounced against him: ‘Woe unto you that call good evil!’ (v. 20). But as it is, seeing that he rejects alike ‘blood’, ‘the will of the flesh’, and ‘the will of man’, it is certain that the will of man is of no more avail to make men the sons of God than ‘blood’ or carnal birth. And none doubts that carnal birth does not make sons of God; for Paul says: ‘They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God’ (Rom. 9.8), and proves it by the cases of Ishmael and Esau.

The same John introduces the Baptist speaking of Christ thus: ‘And of his fulness have we all received, and grace for grace’ (1.16). He says that we receive grace out of the fulness of Christ—but for what merit or effort? ‘For grace,’ he says; that is, the grace of Christ; as Paul says: ‘The grace of God, and the gift of grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many’ (Rom. 5.15). Where now is the endeavour of ‘free-will’ that secures grace ? John is here saying, not only that grace is not received by any effort of our own, but that it comes by the grace of another, that is, ‘one man, Jesus Christ’. So, either it is false that we receive our grace for the grace of another, or else it is apparent that ‘free-will’ is nothing; for these two positions cannot stand together, that the grace of God is *both* so cheap that it may be gained anywhere and everywhere by a little endeavour on the part of any man, *and* so dear that it is given to us only in and through the grace of this one great man!

And I could wish that the guardians of ‘free-will’ would be taught by this passage to recognise that when they assert ‘freewill’ they are denying Christ. For if I obtain the grace of God by my own endeavour, what need have I of the grace of Christ for the receiving of my grace ? When I have the grace of God, what do I need besides ? The Diatribe said, and all the Sophists say, that we obtain the grace of God by our own endeavour, and are thereby made ready to receive it, not, indeed, as of *condignity,* but as of *congruity.[^10]* This is plainly to deny Christ. It is for His grace, the Baptist says here, that we receive grace. Earlier on, I confuted their fabrication about ‘condignity’ and ‘congruity’, showing that these are empty words, but that what they really believe in is condign merit, and that their view involves greater impiety than that of the Pelagians; as I said. Thus it is that the ungodly Sophists, together with the Diatribe, deny the Lord Christ, who bought us, more than ever the Pelagians or any heretics did! So utterly does grace refuse to allow any particle or power of ‘free-will’ to stand beside it!

That the protectors of ‘free-will’ deny Christ is proved, not by this Scripture only, but by their own lives. By this doctrine they have made Christ to be, no longer a sweet Mediator, but a dreadful Judge, whom they strive to placate by the intercessions of the Mother and of the Saints, and by devising many works, rites, observances and vows, by which they aim to appease Christ so that He may give them grace. They do not believe that He intercedes before God and obtains grace for them by His blood, and ‘grace’ (as is here said) ‘for grace’. And as they believe, so it is unto them. Christ is in truth an inexorable judge to them, and deservedly so; for they abandon Him in His office as a Mediator and kindest Saviour, and account His blood and grace as of less worth than the efforts and endeavours of ‘free-will’!

### (xiii) John 3. 1ff.: the case of Nicodemus (778-779)

Now let us hear of a case of ‘free-will’. Nicodemus is surely a man in whom you can find no lack of anything for which ‘freewill’ avails. What in the way of effort and endeavour does he leave undone ? He confesses Christ to be true, and to have come from God, he refers to his signs, he comes by night to hear and discuss further. Does he not seem to have sought by the power of ‘free-will’ all that pertains to godliness and salvation ? But see what shipwreck he makes. When he hears Christ teach the true way of salvation, by new birth, does he acknowledge it and confess that in time past he sought it ? No; he starts back, and is confounded; and not only says that he does not understand it, but turns from it as an impossibility. ‘How can these things be?’ he says (John 3.9). And no wonder; for who ever heard that man must be ‘born again of water and of the Spirit’ to be saved (w. 3, 5) ? Who ever thought that the Son of God must be ‘lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life’ (vv. 14-15)? Did the best and acutest philosophers ever mention it ? Did the princes or this world ever acquire this knowledge? Did any man’s ‘free-will’ ever endeavour after it? Does not Paul acknowledge it to be wisdom hidden in a mystery, foretold indeed by the prophets but revealed only by the gospel, so that it was from eternity secret and unknown to the world (cf. 1 Cor. 2.7) ? What need I say? Let us ask experience: the whole world, human reason, yes, ‘free-will’, are forced to confess that they had not known nor heard of Christ before the gospel entered the world. And if they did not know Him, much less did they, or could they, seek Him, or make endeavours after Him. But Christ is the way, the truth, the life, and salvation (ch. John 14.6). ‘Free-will’ is therefore confessing, willy-nilly, that by its own strength it neither knew nor could seek those things that belong to the way, the truth and salvation. And yet, in the teeth of this very confession of our own experience, we madly argue with empty words that a great power remains within us, which can know and apply itself to the things that belong to salvation! This is just to say that Christ, the Son of God, was lifted up for us, which is something that none has ever known or could conceive of; but that this very ignorance is not ignorance, but knowledge of Christ, that is, of the things that belong to salvation! Do you not yet see the palpable truth that those who assert ‘free-will’ are plainly crazed, calling that knowledge which they themselves admit to be ignorance? Is not this what in Isa. 5 is described as ‘calling darkness light’ (v. 20) ? Thus mightily has God stopped the mouth of ‘free-will’ by its own confession and experience; yet not even so can it keep quiet and give glory to God!

### (xiv) John 14.6, 3.18, 36, 27, 31, 8.23: salvation is by Christ alone (779-781)

Moreover, since Christ is said to be ‘the way, the truth, and the life’ (John 14.6), and that categorically, so that whatever is not Christ is not the way, but error, not truth, but untruth, not life, but death, it follows of necessity that ‘free-will’, inasmuch as it neither is Christ, nor is in Christ, is fast bound in error, and untruth, and death. Where and whence, then, comes your intermediate, neutral entity (I mean, the power of ‘free-will’) which, though it is not Christ (that is, the way, the truth and the life), should not be error, or untruth, or death? If all the things that are said of Christ and of grace were not said categorically, so that they may be contrasted with their opposites, like this: out of Christ there is nothing but Satan, out of grace nothing but wrath, out of light nothing but darkness, out of the way nothing but error, out of truth nothing but a lie, out of life nothing but death—were these things not so, what, I ask you, would be the use of all the apostolic discourses and, indeed, of the entire Scriptures? They would all be written in vain, for they would not compel the admission that men need Christ (which is their main burden), and that for the following reason: something intermediate would be found which, of itself, would be neither evil nor good, neither Christ’s nor Satan’s, neither true nor false, neither alive nor dead, neither something nor nothing (perhaps), and its name would be called ‘the most excellent and exalted thing in the whole human race’! Now, choose which you will have. If you grant that the Scriptures speak categorically, you can say nothing of ‘freewill’ but that which is the opposite of Christ: that is, that error, death, Satan and all evils reign in it. If you do not grant that the Scriptures speak categorically, you so weaken them, that they establish nothing and fail to prove that men need Christ; and thus, in setting up ‘free-will’, you set aside Christ, and make havoc of the entire Scripture. Though with your lips you pretend to confess Christ, you really deny Him in your heart. For if the power of ‘free-will’ is not wholly and damnably astray, but sees and wills what is good and upright and pertains to salvation, then it is in sound health, it does not need Christ the physician, nor did Christ redeem that part of man; for what need is there of light and life, where light and life exist already? And if that power is not redeemed by Christ, then the best part in man is not redeemed, but is of itself good and sound. And then God is unjust if He damns any man, for He damns that in man which is very good and sound; that is, innocent! No man is without ‘free-will’; and though the bad man abuses it, yet according to your teaching the power itself is not destroyed, but can and does still endeavour towards good. And if it does, it is undoubtedly good, holy and just; wherefore, it should not be damned, but separated from the man who is to be damned. But that cannot be done; and if it could, man would then be without ‘free-will’, and would not be man at all; he would have neither merit nor demerit, nor could he be saved, but he would be simply a brute beast, and no longer immortal. It remains therefore, that God is unjust to damn this good, righteous, holy power in man, which even in a bad man does not need Christ!

Let us proceed with John. ‘He that believeth on him’ he says, ‘is not judged; but he that believeth not is judged already, because he hath not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of God’ (3.18). Tell me: is ‘free-will’ among the number of them that believe, or not ? If so, then again it has no need of grace, for of itself it believes on Christ (Whom of itself it neither knows nor conceives of!). If not, then it is judged already; and what does that mean, but that in God’s sight it is damned ? But God damns only the ungodly. So it is Ungodly. And what godliness can that which is ungodly endeavour after? Nor do I think that the power of ‘free-will’ can be excepted from this condemnation, for John speaks of the whole man as being condemned.

Moreover, unbelief is not a ‘gross affection’, but is the supreme affection, seated and ruling on the throne of will and reason, just like its opposite, faith. Now, to be unbelieving is to deny God and make him a liar, as it says in the first chapter of 1 John: ‘If we believe not, we make God a liar’ (5.10). How then can this power, which is opposed to God and makes Him a liar, endeavour after good ? If this power were not unbelieving and ungodly, John ought not to say of the whole man that he is judged already, but to say this: ‘Man is judged already in respect of his gross affections; but he is not judged in respect of his best and most excellent part, for that endeavours after faith, or, rather, already believes!’ So, when Scripture so often says: ‘All men are liars’, we should say, on the authority of ‘freewill’ : On the contrary; it is rather Scripture that lies; for man is not a liar in his best part (that is, his reason and will), but in his flesh only (that is, his blood and bones); so that the totality from which man gets his name (that is, his reason and will) is healthy and holy.’ And the Baptist’s statement, ‘He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; but he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him’ (John 3.36), must be understood like this: ‘upon him’, that is, upon man’s gross affections, abides the wrath of God; but upon the power of ‘free-will’, that is, of will and reason, abides grace, and life everlasting! In order to keep ‘free-will’ standing, you must invoke a *synechdoche,* to wrest all that is said in the Scriptures against ungodly men and limit it to man’s brutal part only, so that his rational and truly human part may be preserved. In that case, thanks to the assertors of ‘free-will’, I may sin without qualms, secure in the knowledge that my reason and will (my ‘free-will’, that is) cannot be damned, because it is never destroyed, but for ever remains sound, righteous and holy. And as long as my will and my reason are blessed, I shall be glad for my filthy animal flesh to be taken away and damned; so far am I from wanting Christ to be its Redeemer! Do you see where the doctrine of ‘free-will’ brings us? It denies all things, divine and human, temporal and eternal, and derides itself by such a series of enormities!

Again, the Baptist says: ‘A man can receive nothing, except it were given him from above’ (3.27). Here the Diatribe may desist from showing off its wealth of words by enumerating all the things that we have from heaven. We are discussing, not nature, but grace; we ask, not what we are on earth, but what we are in heaven before God. We know that man was made lord over things below him, and that he has a right and a free will with respect to them, that they should obey him and do as he wills and thinks. But our question is this: whether he has ‘free-will’ God-ward, that God should obey man and do what man wills, or whether God has not rather a free will with respect to man, that man should will and do what God wills, and be able to do nothing but what He wills and does. The Baptist here says that man ‘can receive nothing, except it be given him from above’. Which means that ‘free-will’ must be nothing!

Again: ‘He that is of the earth is earthly and speaketh of the earth; he that cometh from heaven is above all’ (v. 31). Here again, John makes all those that are not Christ’s earthly, says that they savour and speak of earthly things; and he leaves none in an intermediate position. But ‘free-will’ is certainly not ‘he that cometh from heaven’. So it must necessarily be of the earth, and savour and speak of the earth. If there were a power in any man which at any time, in any place, or by any work did not savour of earthly things, the Baptist ought to have made an exception of that man, and not said generally of all that are outside Christ, that they are of the earth and speak of the earth.

Later, in the eighth chapter, Christ also says: ‘Ye are of the world, I am not of the world. Ye are from beneath, I am from above’ (v. 23). Those to whom he spoke had ‘free-will’, that is, reason and will; yet He says that they are ‘of the world’. What news would he have brought, had He merely meant that they were ‘of the world’ with respect to their flesh and gross affections ? Did not all the world know that before ? And what need was there for Him to say that they were ‘of the world’ with respect to that part of them which they had in common with the brutes ? For in that sense beasts are ‘of the world’ also.

### (xv) John 6.44: the inability of man to believe the gospel (781-782)

Next: when Christ says in John 6: ‘No man can come to me, except My Father which hath sent me draw him’ (v. 44), what does he leave to ‘free-will’? He says man needs to hear and learn of the Father Himself, and that all must be taught of God. Here, indeed, he declares, not only that the works and efforts of ‘free-will’ are unavailing, but that even the very word of the gospel (of which He is here speaking) is heard in vain, unless the Father Himself speaks within, and teaches, and draws. ‘No man, no man can come,’ he says, and what he is talking about is your ‘power whereby man can make some endeavour towards Christ’. In things that pertain to salvation, He asserts that power to be null.

‘Free-will’ is not helped by what the Diatribe quotes from Augustine in an attempt to discredit this plain and powerful Scripture: that is, the statement that ‘God draws us as we draw sheep, by holding out a branch to them’ (cf. Augustine, *Tract, in Joannis ev.,* 26.5). From this simile the Diatribe would have it inferred that there is in us a power to follow the drawing of God. But the simile does not hold in this passage. For God displays, not just one, but all His good gifts, even His own Son, Christ, and yet, unless He inwardly displays something more and draws in another manner, no man follows Him; indeed, the whole world persecutes the Son whom He displays! The simile well fits the experience of the godly, who are already ‘sheep’ and know God as their Shepherd; living in, and moved by, the Spirit, they follow wherever God wills, and whatever He shows them. But the ungodly does not ‘come’, even when he hears the word, unless the Father draws and teaches him inwardly; which He does by shedding abroad His Spirit. When that happens, there follows a ‘drawing’ other than that which is outward; Christ is then displayed by the enlightening of the Spirit, and by it man is rapt to Christ with the sweetest rapture, he being passive while God speaks, teaches and draws, rather than seeking or running himself.

### (xvi) John 16.9: the natural prevalence of unbelief (782-783)

Let me adduce one more passage from John. In the sixteenth chapter, he says: ‘The Spirit shall reprove the world of sin, because they believe not in me’ (v. 9). Here you see that it is sin not to believe on Christ. And this sin is seated, not in the skin or in the hair, but in the reason and the will. Since he makes the whole world guilty of this sin, and since it is notorious from experience that the world is as ignorant of this sin as it is of Christ, so that it has to be revealed by the Spirit’s reproof, it is apparent that ‘free-will’, along with the will and reason, is adjudged in the sight of God to be led captive by this sin, and so to stand condemned. Hence, so long as it is ignorant of Christ and does not believe on Him, it can will and attempt no good thing, but necessarily serves that sin of which it is ignorant.

To sum up: Since Scripture everywhere proclaims Christ categorically and antithetically, as I said, and thereby subjects all that is without the Spirit of Christ to Satan, ungodliness, error, darkness, sin, death and the wrath of God, every statement concerning Christ is a direct testimony against ‘free-will’. And such statements are innumerable; indeed, they constitute the whole of Scripture. If, therefore, we conduct our argument with Scripture as judge, the victory in every respect belongs to me; for there is not one jot or tittle of Scripture left that does not condemn the doctrine of ‘free-will’!

Though the great theologians who guard ‘free-will’ may not know, or pretend not to know, that Scripture proclaims Christ categorically and antithetically, all Christians know it, and commonly confess it. They know that there are in the world two kingdoms at war with each other. In the one, Satan reigns (which is why Christ calls him ‘the prince of this world’ (John 12.31), and Paul ‘the god of this world’ (2 Cor. 4.4)). He, so Paul again tells us, holds captive at his will all that are not wrested from him by the Spirit of Christ; nor does he allow them to be plucked away by any other power but the Spirit of God, as Christ tells us in the parable of the strong man armed keeping his palace in peace. In the other kingdom, Christ reigns. His kingdom continually resists and wars against that of Satan; and we are translated into His kingdom, not by our own power, but by the grace of God, which delivers us from this present evil world and tears us away from the power of darkness. The knowledge and confession of these two kingdoms, ever warring against each other with all their might and power, would suffice by itself to confute the doctrine of ‘free-will’, seeing that we are compelled to serve in Satan’s kingdom if we are not plucked from it by Divine power. The common man, I repeat, knows this, and confesses it plainly enough by his proverbs, prayers, efforts and entire life.

### (xvii) Rom. 7; Gal. 5: the power of the ‘flesh? in the saints disproves ‘free-will’ (783)

I forbear to insist on the Achilles of my arguments, which the Diatribe proudly passes by without notice—I mean, Paul’s teaching in Rom. 7 and Gal. 5, that there is in the saints and the godly such a mighty warfare between the Spirit and the flesh that they cannot do what they would. From this I would argue as follows: If human nature is so bad that in those who are born again of the Spirit it not only fails to endeavour after good, but actually fights against and opposes good, how could it endeavour after good in those who are not yet born again of the Spirit, but serve under Satan in the old man ? And Paul is not here speaking of gross affections only (which is the universal expedient by which the Diatribe regularly parries the thrust of every Scripture); but he lists among the works of the flesh heresy, idolatry, contentions, divisions, etc., which reign in what you call the most exalted faculties, that is, reason and will, if, now, the flesh with these affections wars against the Spirit in the saints, much more will it war against God in the ungodly and in their ‘free-will’! Hence in Rom. 8 he calls it ‘enmity against God’ (v. 7). May I say that I should be interested to see *this* argument punctured, and ‘free-will’ safeguarded from its attack!

### (xviii) Of the comfort of knowing that salvation does not depend on ‘free-will’ (783)

I frankly confess that, for myself, even if it could be, I should not want ‘free-will’ to be given me, nor anything to be left in my own hands to enable me to endeavour after salvation; not merely because in face of so many dangers, and adversities, and assaults of devils, I could not stand my ground and hold fast my ‘free-will’ (for one devil is stronger than all men, and on these terms no man could be saved); but because, even were there no dangers, adversities, or devils, I should still be forced to labour with no guarantee of success, and to beat my fists at the air. If I lived and worked to all eternity, my conscience would never reach comfortable certainty as to how much it must do to satisfy God. Whatever work I had done, there would still be a nagging doubt[^11] as to whether it pleased God, or whether He required something more. The experience of all who seek righteousness by works proves that; and I learned it well enough myself over a period of many years, to my own great hurt. But now that God has taken my salvation out of the control of my own will, and put it under the control of His, and promised to save me, not according to my working or running, but according to His own grace and mercy, I have the comfortable certainty that He is faithful and will not lie to me, and that He is also great and powerful, so that no devils or opposition can break Him or pluck me from Him. ‘No one,’ He says, ‘shall pluck them out of my hand, because my Father which gave them me is greater than all’ (John 10.28-29). Thus it is that, if not all, yet some, indeed many, are saved; whereas, by the power of‘free-will’ none at all could be saved, but every one of us would perish.

Furthermore, I have the comfortable certainty that I please God, not by reason of the merit of my works, but by reason of His merciful favour promised to me; so that, if I work too little, or badly, He does not impute it to me, but with fatherly compassion pardons me and makes me better. This is the glorying of all the saints in their God.

### (xix) Of faith in the justice of God in His dealings with men (784-786)

You may be worried that it is hard to defend the mercy and equity of God in damning the undeserving, that is, ungodly persons, who, being born in ungodliness, can by no means avoid being ungodly, and staying so, and being damned, but are compelled by natural necessity to sin and perish; as Paul says: ‘We were all the children of wrath, even as others’ (Eph. 2.3), created such by God Himself from a seed that had been corrupted by the sin of the one man, Adam. But here God must be reverenced and held in awe, as being most merciful to those whom He justifies and saves in their own utter unworthiness; and we must show some measure of deference to His Divine wisdom by believing Him just when to us He seems unjust. If His justice were such as could be adjudged just by human reckoning, it clearly would not be Divine; it would in no way differ from human justice. But inasmuch as He is the one true God, wholly incomprehensible and inaccessible to man’s understanding, it is reasonable, indeed inevitable, that His justice also should be incomprehensible; as Paul cries, saying: Ό the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out!’ (Rom. 11.33). They would not, however, be ‘unsearchable’ if we could at every point grasp the grounds on which they are just. What is man compared with God ? How much can our power achieve compared with His power ? What is our strength compared with His strength ? What is our knowledge compared with His wisdom ? What is our substance compared with His substance ? In a word, what is all that we are compared with all that He is ? If, now, even nature teaches us to acknowledge that human power, strength, wisdom, knowledge and substance, and all that is ours, is as nothing compared with the Divine power, strength, wisdom, knowledge and substance, what perversity is it on our part to worry at the justice and the judgment of the only God, and to arrogate so much to our own judgment as to presume to comprehend, judge and evaluate God’s judgment! Why do we not in like manner say at this point: Our judgment is nothing compared with God’s judgment’ ? Ask reason whether force of conviction does not compel her to acknowledge herself foolish and rash for not allowing God’s judgment to be incomprehensible, when she confesses that all the other things of God are incomprehensible! In everything else, we allow God His Divine Majesty; in the single case of His judgment, we are ready to deny it! To think that we cannot for a little while *believe* that He is just, when He has actually promised us that when He reveals His glory we shall all clearly *see* that He both was and is just!

I will give a parallel case, in order to strengthen our faith in God’s justice, and to reassure that ‘evil eye’ which holds Him under suspicion of injustice. Behold! God governs the external affairs of the world in such a way that, if you regard and follow the judgment of human reason, you are forced to say, either that there is no God, or that God is unjust; as the poet said: T am often tempted to think there are no gods.’ See the great prosperity of the wicked, and by contrast the great adversity of the good. Proverbs, and experience, the parent of proverbs, bear record that the more abandoned men are, the more successful they are. ‘The tabernacle of robbers prosper,’ says Job (12.6), and Ps. 72 complains that sinners in the world are full of riches (Ps. 73.12). Is it not, pray, universally held to be most unjust that bad men should prosper, and good men be afflicted? Yet that is the way of the world. Hereupon some of the greatest minds have fallen into denying the existence of God, and imagining that Chance governs all things at random. Such were the Epicureans, and Pliny. And Aristotle, wishing to set his ‘prime Being’ free from misery, holds that he sees nothing but himself; for Aristotle supposes that it would be very irksome to such a Being to behold so many evils and injustices! And the Prophets, who believed in God’s existence, were still more tempted concerning the injustice of God. Jeremiah, Job, David, Asaph and others are cases in point. What do you suppose Demosthenes and Cicero thought, when, having done all they could, they received as their reward an unhappy death? Yet all this, which looks so much like injustice in God, and is traduced as such by arguments which no reason or light of nature can resist, is most easily cleared up by the light of the gospel and the knowledge of grace, which teaches us that though the wicked flourish in their bodies, yet they perish in their souls. And a summary explanation of this whole inexplicable problem is found in a single little word: *There is a life after this life; and all that is not punished and repaid here will be punished and repaid there; for this life is nothing more than a precursor, or, rather, a beginning, of the life that is to come.*

If, now, this problem, which was debated in every age but never solved, is swept away and settled so easily by the light of the gospel, which shines only in the Word and to faith, how do you think it will be when the light of the Word and faith shall cease, and the real facts, and the Majesty of God, shall be revealed as they are ? Do you not think that the light of glory will be able with the greatest ease to solve problems that are insoluble in the light of the word and grace, now that the light of grace has so easily solved this problem, which that was insoluble by the light of nature ?

Keep in view three lights: the light of nature, the light of grace, and the light of glory (this is a common and a good distinction). By the light of nature, it is inexplicable that it should be just for the good to be afflicted and the bad to prosper; but the light of grace explains it. By the light of grace, it is inexplicable how God can damn him who by his own strength can do nothing but sin and become guilty. Both the light of nature and the light of grace here insist that the fault lies not in the wretchedness of man, but in the injustice of God; nor can they judge otherwise of a God who crowns the ungodly freely, without merit, and does not crown, but damns another, who is perhaps less, and certainly not more, ungodly. But the light of glory insists otherwise, and will one day reveal God, to whom alone belongs a judgment whose justice is incomprehensible, as a God Whose justice is most righteous and evident— provided only that in the meanwhile we *believe* it, as we are instructed and encouraged to do by the example of the light of grace explaining what was a puzzle of the same order to the light of nature.

I shall here end this book, ready though I am to pursue the matter further, if need be; but I think that abundant satisfaction has here been afforded for the godly man who is willing to yield to truth without stubborn resistance. For if we believe it to be true that God foreknows and foreordains all things; that He cannot be deceived or obstructed in His foreknowledge and predestination; and that nothing happens but at His will (which reason itself is compelled to grant); then, on reason’s own testimony, there can be no ‘free-will’ in man, or angel, or in any creature.

So, if we believe that Satan is the prince of this world, ever ensnaring and opposing the kingdom of Christ with all his strength, and that he does not let his prisoners go unless he is driven out by the power of the Divine Spirit, it is again apparent that there can be no ‘free-will’.

So, if we believe that original sin has ruined us to such an extent that even in the godly, who are led by the Spirit, it causes abundance of trouble by striving against good, it is clear that in a man who lacks the Spirit nothing is left that can turn itself to good, but only to evil.

Again, if the Jews, who followed after righteousness with all their powers, fell into unrighteousness instead, while the Gentiles, who followed after unrighteousness, attained to an un-hoped-for righteousness, by God’s free gift, it is equally apparent from their very works and experience that man without grace can will nothing but evil.

And, finally, if we believe that Christ redeemed men by His blood, we are forced to confess that all of man was lost; otherwise, we make Christ either wholly superfluous, or else the redeemer of the least valuable part of man only; which is blasphemy, and sacrilege.

---

### Notes

[^1]: epitheton.
[^2]: =‘Greeks.’
[^3]: dialogismis.
[^4]: de vi potentiae scilicet, non de actu disputamus.
[^5]: medium
[^6]: See p. 486, supra.
[^7]: Incidit in Scyllam, dum vult vitare Charybdim.
[^8]: appellantes scapham scapham, ficum ficum.
[^9]: per contentionem.
[^10]: licet non de condigno, sed de congruo.
[^11]: scrupulus.
