# VIII. Conclusion (W.A. 786–787)

Now, my good Erasmus, I entreat you for Christ’s sake to keep your promise at last. You promised that you would yield to him who taught better than yourself. Lay aside respect of persons! I acknowledge that you are a great man, adorned with many of God’s noblest gifts—wit, learning and an almost miraculous eloquence, to say nothing of the rest; whereas I have and am nothing, save that I would glory in being a Christian. Moreover, I give you hearty praise and commendation on this further account—that you alone, in contrast with all others, have attacked the real thing, that is, the essential issue. You have not wearied me with those extraneous[^1] issues about the Papacy, purgatory, indulgences and such like—trifles, rather than issues—in respect of which almost all to date have sought my blood (though without success); you, and you alone, have seen the hinge on which all turns, and aimed for the vital spot.[^2]For that I heartily thank you; for it is more gratifying to me to deal with this issue, insofar as time and leisure permit me to do so. If those who have attacked me in the past had done as you have done, and if those who now boast of new spirits and revelations would do the same also, we should have less sedition and sects and more peace and concord. But thus it is that God, through Satan, has punished our unthankfulness.

However, if you cannot treat of this issue in a different way from your treatment of it in this Diatribe, it is my earnest wish that you would remain content with your own gift, and confine yourself to pursuing, adorning and promoting the study of literature and languages; as hitherto you have done, to great advantage and with much credit. By your studies you have rendered me also some service, and I confess myself much indebted to you; certainly, in that regard, I unfeignedly honour and sincerely respect you. But God has not yet willed nor granted that you should be equal to the subject of our present debate. Please do not think that any arrogance lies behind my words when I say that I pray that the Lord will speedily make you as much my superior in this as you already are in all other respects. It is no new thing for God to instruct a Moses by a Jethro, or to teach a Paul by an Ananias. You say that *‘you have wandered far from the mark, if you are ignorant of Christ.’[^3]* I think that you yourself see how the matter stands. But not all will go astray if you or I go astray. God is One Who is proclaimed as wonderful among His saints, so that we may regard as saints persons that are very far from sanctity. Nor is it hard to believe that you, as being a man, should fail to understand aright, and to note with sufficient care, the Scriptures, or the sayings of the fathers, under whose guidance you think that you are holding to the mark. That you have thus failed is clear enough from your saying that *you assert nothing, but have ‘made comparisons’* .[^4] He who sees to the heart of the matter and properly understands it does not write like that. Now I, in this book of mine, have not ‘made comparisons’, but have asserted, and do assert; and I do not want judgment to rest with anyone,[^5]but I urge all men to submit! May the Lord, whose cause this is, enlighten you and make you a vessel to honour and glory. *Amen.*

---

### Notes

[^1]: alienis.
[^2]: ipsum iugulum petisti.
[^3]: know well enough that I shall he told: Let Erasmus learn Christ and bid farewell to human sagacity: no man understands these things but he that has the Spirit of God. If I do not yet understand what Christ is, then, of course, I have hitherto wanderedfar from the mark·'
[^4]: contulisse.
[^5]: I have made comparisons: let judgment rest with others.'
