# 参考书目

Alden, Robert L. *Job*. The New American Commentary. Vol. 11. Nashville, TN: Broadman & Holman, 1993.

Anderson, Francis I. *Job: An Introduction and Commentary*. Downers Grove, IL: Inter-Varsity, 1976.

Andersen, Ragnar. "The Elihu Speeches: Their Place and Sense in the Book of Job." *Tyndale Bulletin* 66 no 1. 2015: 75-94.

Brinks, C L. "Who Speaks Words without Knowledge? A Response to Wilcox and Bimson." *Journal for the Study of the Old Testament*. 35 no 2 (2010): 197-207.

Calvin, John. *Sermon on Job 32:4-10*. Translated by Arthur Golding. London 1574. https://www.truecovenanter.com/calvin/calvin_sermons_job_32_04etc.html.

Cherney, Kenneth A. "Exegetical Brief: Did Job 'Repent'? (42:6)." *Wisconsin Lutheran Quarterly*, 109 no 2 (2012): 132-137.

Clines, David J. A. *The Book of Job 21-37*. Word Biblical Commentary. Vol. 18A. Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, 2006.

Clines, David J A. "Putting Elihu in his Place: A Proposal for the Relocation of Job 32-37." *Journal for the Study of the Old Testament*. 29 no 2 (2004): 243-253.

Curtis, John B. "Why Were the Elihu Speeches Added to the Book of Job?" *Proceedings of the Eastern Great Lakes and Midwest Biblical Societies* 8 (1988): 93-99.

Dick, Michael. "Job 31, the Oath of Innocence, and the Sage." *Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft* 95 (1983): 31-53.

Estes, Daniel J. *Handbook on the Wisdom Books and Psalms*. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2005.

Freedman, David Noel. "The Elihu Speeches in the Book of Job." *Harvard Theological Review*, 61 no 1 (1968): 51-59.

Gordis, Robert. *The Book of God and Man: A Study of Job*. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1965.

Gray, John. *The Book of Job*. The Text of the Hebrew Bible, 1. Sheffield, UK: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2015.

Hartley, John E. *The Book of Job*. The New International Commentary on the Old Testament. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1988.

Jones, Scott C. *Rumors of Wisdom: Job 28 as Poetry*. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2009.

Koehler, Ludwig and Walter Baumgartner. *The Hebrew and Aramaic Lexicon of the Old Testament*. NV, Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill, 2000.

Kolb, Robert and Timothy J. Wengert, eds. *The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church*. Minneapolis: Fortress, 2000.

Lessing, R. Reed and Andrew E. Steinmann. *Prepare the Way of the Lord: An Introduction to the Old Testament*. St. Louis, MO: Concordia, 2014.

Longman III, Tremper. *Job*. Baker Commentary on the Old Testament. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2012.

McCabe, Robert V. "Elihu's Contribution to the Thought of the Book of Job." *Detroit Baptist Seminary Journal*. 2 (1997): 47-80.

Michel, Walter L. "Job's Real Friend: Elihu." *Criterion* 21 (1982): 29-32.

Pieper, August. "The Book of Job in Its Significance for Preaching and the Care of Souls." Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Essay Files. Translated by J. A. Fricke and A. Schuetze, 1960. Translation updated by T. Jeske, May 2013.

Reyburn, William D. *A Handbook on the Book of Job*. UBS Handbook Series. New York: United Bible Societies, 1992.

Rowley, H. H. *Job*. New Century Bible. London: Oliphants, 1976.

Sauer, Alfred von Rohr. "Salvation by Grace: The Heart of Job's Theology." *Concordia Theological Monthly*. 37 no 5 (1966): 259-270.

Seow, C. L. "Elihu's Revelation." *Theology Today*. 68 no 3 (2011): 253-271.

————. *Job: Interpretation and Commentary*. 2 Vols. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2013.

Schreiner, Susan E. *Where Shall Wisdom Be Found? Calvin's Exegesis of Job from Medieval and Modern Perspectives*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

Shields, Martin A. "Was Elihu Right?" *Journal for the Evangelical Study of the Old Testament*, 3 no 2 (2014): 155-170.

Simonetti, Manlio and Marco Conti, ed. *Job*. Vol. 6 of *Ancient Christian Commentary on Scripture: Old Testament*. Edited by Thomas C. Oden. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2006.

Steinmann, Andrew E. "The Structure and Message of the Book of Job." *Vetus Testamentum* 46, no. 1 (January 1996): 85–100.

Veith Jr., Gene Edward. *God at Work*. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2002.

Walton, John H. and Tremper Longman III. *How To Read Job*. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2015.

Waters, Larry J. "Elihu's Theology and His View of Suffering." *Bibliotheca sacra*, 156 no 622 (1999): 143-159.

Whybray, Norman. *Job*. Readings: A New Biblical Commentary. Sheffield, UK: Sheffield Phoenix, 2008.

Wilson, Lindsay. "The Role of the Elihu Speeches in the Book of Job." *The Reformed Theological Review*, 55 no 2 (1996): 81-94.

Wingren, Gustaf. *Luther on Vocation*. Minneapolis: Fortress; rpt. Evansville, IN: Ballast, 1994.

Wolfers, David. "Elihu: The Provenance and Content of His Speeches." *Dor le dor*, 16 no 2 (1988): 90-98.

Zuck, Roy B. "Job's Discourse on God's Wisdom: An Exposition of Job 28," in *Sitting with Job: Selected Studies on the Book of Job*. Edited by Roy B. Zuck. Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2003: 299-302.
