# The gospel is big

In this first chapter we will look at the basics. We live our lives for God because he loves us and has forgiven us. Before we look at Scripture, though, we need to understand a few things about gospel motivation itself. To do this, we need to air a little criticism of the sinful nature and some of the paths it leads us down.

In order to identify with and understand the apostles’ words about serving the Lord and living our lives for him, we must understand one thing: The gospel is big, very big. It is huge in the minds and hearts of the Bible writers. It is so big that it dominates all their thinking and, therefore, all their actions, Without the gospel and all its blessings in view, they do nothing, they say nothing, and they write nothing.

Let’s elaborate on this. Although we speak of gospel motivation, the gospel is never merely a means to that end. It is the end itself. It is God’s gift to us. The gospel spurs us to action, but it does so because it is our main focus. It motivates us because it dominates our lives. Unless it does so, it cannot really motivate us.

We are tempted to make the gospel too small in our thinking. We all do this in a number of ways. First, we make the gospel too small when we use it to accomplish our own agendas, as legitimate as those agendas might be. We all have certain needs in our lives. Those needs tend to dominate our thinking. It may be the need for food, for clothing, or for shelter. In our country most of us have enough of these things, so our needs are usually higher up on the hierarchy of needs. We need a sense of fulfillment; we need love from other human beings; we need satisfaction in our jobs. We may need help in our families; we may need help in our marriages; we may need help with parents or in-laws; we may need help with our neighbors. These needs clamor for attention and dominate our views. If those needs become the dominant factor in our lives and if the gospel becomes the means for solving those problems, then the gospel has become too small in our lives.

By nature we tend to focus on the law and how keeping the law affects our lives for the better. The gospel then becomes motivation for keeping the law so that the Lord will bless our lives. When a Christian moves in this direction, the gospel invariably becomes less important and the law becomes more important. This is not to deny that keeping Ged’s law results in blessings for our lives. But if our focus is primarily on these blessings and our means for attaining them become the law— after all, it’s something we can do, a method we can understand and follow—the gospel shrinks in importance in our minds; it becomes merely a tool. To put it another way, the gospel becomes extremely important because it is the only thing that can motivate us to keep the law and be blessed. People who think this way seem to value the gospel, but in reality they do not value it as they should.

Not only individual Christians but Christian congregations and church bodies as a whole face this temptation. Congrega-

tions rejoice in God’s love and forgiveness, and Christians gather to thank and praise God for what he has done. But when a congregation faces difficulties, the gospel tends to shrink and a desire to motivate Christian activity of one sort or another takes its place. For example, when funds are low, sermons on Christian giving are needed, but always with a suitable amount of “gospel motivation.” When membership is waning, sermons on reaching out to others are needed, but always with “gospel motivation.” When people are being loveless in a congregation, there must be sermons on Christian love, “motivated by the gospel,” to be sure.

While you can understand these needs and the desire to motivate fruits of faith by the gospel, the temptation is to shift the emphasis from the gospel to its results and, in the process, to make the gospel too small. Christians in the pews know when the pastor’s real agenda is getting them to do something, no matter how clearly he might preach the gospel in the process.

This shift in emphasis results in deadness, not just in our faith in the gospel but in our lives as well. The beautiful and many-faceted way the Bible speaks about our Christian lives becomes pale and lifeless. What results is a monotonous repetition of the basic truths of the gospel. Why? Because the gospel and all it means for us is not our main area of concern and so little time is invested in exploring it and explaining it and seeking scriptural ways to speak about it. It becomes smaller and smaller and less and less a part of our congregation’s ministry. It becomes implied in what we do, and what is merely implied is soon lost to our consciousness.

To look at this another way, recall Jesus’ statement in the Sermon on the Mount. When he preached against worry, he said, “Seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well” (Matthew 6:33). What does the sinful nature do with this passage? It focuses us on “all these things” and suggests that we focus on the gospel and Christ’s righteousness so that all these things will be ours. It turns Jesus’ words, which he spoke to help us avoid thinking about the things we need in life, into a method to obtain these very things. To the extent that the sinful nature

gets us to think this way, the less we put Jesus’ words into practice. Jesus is telling us not to worry about these things at all. Focus on the gospel, he tells us. Let that be as big as it deserves to be in your thinking. Let that be your love, your purpose for living, your everything. And when Satan and your sinful nature buck and object that you will lose everything, even what you need for your lives, in the process of focusing on the gospel, then you can comfort yourself with Jesus’ words that God will not let you go without. The gospel is never something we use. The gospel is always something that dominates our lives. It is not to be used to effect sanctification. It leads to sanctification. In the fullest sense, holiness of living flows from the gospel only when the gospel is the center of our thinking and more highly valued than the holiness of life that flows from it.

So where is the answer to keeping the gospel big in our minds? One thing is certain: The answer is not found in us. At least I know it is not found in me. By nature I have no love for the gospel or for the One who gave it. All I am concerned about is myself, my needs, my aspirations, my agenda. If there is any love for the gospel in my heart, and by God’s grace—amidst all the baggage of self-love—there is, it is there only because of the love God has shown in rescuing me from hell.

The problem of eternal punishment in hell and the goal of eternal life in heaven for everyone on earth is God’s agenda. God’s purpose in giving us his Word is tied up with this agenda. His agenda is big, bigger than any agenda we might have. All our personal and congregational agendas must revolve around his. There are many ways God has called us to serve him. There are many blessings, even in this life, that come our way as we engage in his work. But all our service and every good thing that comes our way in this life is in some way related to God’s ultimate and eternal agenda. This is what we must realize if we are to read with any profit the apostles’ words about service to God. I do not come to Scripture asking how Scripture can fix this or that problem. I come to Scripture to learn the problem God wanted to fix and how he has fixed it. I do not use the gospel to help me accomplish

my goals, no matter how noble they might be. If my goals line up with God’s, then proclaiming the gospel—helping others to know it also—is my goal. Only in this way will we match how the apostles acted and arranged their own lives and how they encouraged others to godly living.

Only God’s grace can make our agendas subservient to his. Only God’s grace can make us see that his agenda is the only important one. Only his grace can open our eyes to the reality about ourselves, our mortality (and immortality), and his fair and just judgment. Only his grace can lead us to see that our lives are but a speck of time and that eternity is endless; and only his grace can help us shape our agendas around that endless eternity and not the speck of time. Only his grace can lead us to know “how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ, and to know this love that surpasses knowledge” (Ephesians 3:18,19).

God’s grace can come with the force of God’s power as it was displayed to Saul of Tarsus when he saw Jesus and listened to his blinding rebuke (Acts 9:1-6). It can come with the gradual yet profound illumination Luther experienced when he finally realized the meaning of the gospel after years of being in bondage to guilt. Or it can come in the gradual way Timothy must have experienced it, for he had been a believer from infancy and, as far as we know, did not have an earthshattering experience (2 Timothy 3:14,15). Yet Paul praised him more highly than anyone else, for Timothy’s agenda was the same as Paul’s.

What can we do so our agenda for gospel motivation imitates Paul’s? Nothing except trust that the Lord will enable us to grow in our understanding of his law and gospel so that the gospel and all its blessings will become bigger and bigger in our minds. Scripture is filled with encouragements to grow and promises that God will enable us to do that. Paul’s words to the Philippians are particularly appropriate. He writes:

One thing I do: Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead, I press on toward the goal to win the prize for which God has called me heavenward in Christ Jesus. All of us who are mature should take such a view of things. And if on some point you think differently, that too

God will make clear to you. Only let us live up to what we have already attained. (Philippians 3:13-16)

Maturity is straining toward the goal to win the prize—this is our agenda in life—and for those of us who are not as mature as Paul, we have his encouragement to live up to what we have already attained. And where we come up short, we have Paul’s promise that God will make clear to us what was so clear to Paul.

The gospel is so big that it completely dominated the apostles’ thinking. Keep that in mind with every passage you read, and pray, as I do, that the Lord open our hearts and minds and that he makes the gospel as big in us as it was in the apostles. When the gospel fills our thoughts, everything Scripture says about gospel motivation will fall into place.

I’ve drawn a conclusion without even looking at Scripture. This is not a legitimate way to start, I know. But this is so important that I wanted to present it first, perhaps to challenge you to look at every passage in these chapters to see whether or not this emphasis is true.
