# Foreword: Why Think about Gospel Motivation?

There are several reasons for writing about gospel motivation. First, I have a tremendous need to become more sanctified, more holy, in my life. Perhaps you too have this need. I remember an old teacher saying, “When I was young, I thought that when I was old I would be pious. Now I am old. I am not pious yet.” Perhaps all Christians think that way. When we are young, we see the years stretching out before us. “There is time,” we say, “time for growth. Things will gradually improve; my strength to resist temptation, to put away pride and ambition, will increase, and I, by God’s grace, will have things under control.” Sad to say, the years that stretch out before us quickly become the years we see over our shoulders, and reality sets in: “T am not pious yet.”

Yes, we do see growth. We do see victories. We do find our understanding and love for God’s Word deepen as time gives us the chance to study it and mine its treasures. The wheels of God, which grind slowly but very fine, work on our Christian character, and we see it mature. But often we only see time giving our pet sins and weaknesses the chance to become even more ingrained. What is more, we find ourselves moving into new and uncharted waters where we are just as much novices in Christian living as we were in other areas when we were young. Changes in where we live, the makeup of our families, and our health, and even how life itself changes as we move from one stage to another, present

new decisions to make in Christ and new temptations to overcome in him. We know Christ will be with us. Our Christian character matures, and we do not doubt so quickly that Jesus will see us through every change. He will give us help and joy. Nevertheless, we are saddened that we are not yet as pious as we wish to be. Paradoxically, growth in faith and maturity gives us keener insight into our failings and so compounds our problem. But we.are confident that the answers to our need for sanctification are all found in Scripture, and this book will aim at finding some of those answers.

The second reason for writing about sanctification stems from how I encouraged my congregations in my sermons to put into practice the instruction IJ offered them. Shallow is a word that comes to mind. Perhaps you remember the old confirmation joke. A veteran confirmation student turns to a new student and says, “Now remember, whatever he asks, just answer, ‘Because Jesus died for my sins.’ No matter what the question, you'll be okay.” It’s a joke, but it’s not so far from the truth. That may be a parody of confirmation class answers, but it is not so far from the truth in how I encouraged sanctification in my sermons. “The Lord died for you. The Lord loves you. Respond with love and service to God’s love for you.” There’s nothing wrong with that encouragement. But it hardly goes deep enough.

Jesus and the apostles go deeper, much deeper, into the gospel message when they encourage us to serve the Lord. What I am in Christ and how the Lord wants me to live are closely intertwined. I was only using a few strands of thread; the apostles used many strands twisted together into a thick rope that cannot easily be broken. A goal of this book will be to explore the many strands that connect faith and life. The depth and power of God’s Word will strengthen in rich and varied ways our ability to speak and encourage others in their lives as God’s children.

The third reason to study the link between faith and works as taught in Scripture is to amplify on the basic (and very true) teachings we learned in the catechism. Our Lutheran heritage and the doctrinal statements that are the heart* of our heritage are great gifts. At the heart of our heritage is a

desire to remain faithful to the gospel. This demands that we use law and gospel carefully. We work hard never to mix the two, that is, turning the law into good news about how I can be right with God or defining the gospel as “good information” on how God wants us to act. To keep these two scriptural teachings separate and to use them as God intended is extremely important for our faith.

So we divide up the teaching. The law shows us our sins. The gospel shows us Christ’s redemption. The law shows us how God wants to be served. We work on each part, helping our students and ourselves to keep things straight, for we know that countless errors have been spawned from not keeping these teachings straight.

When we speak about our Christian lives, however, our desire to keep the law and the gospel in a proper relationship often leads us to speak about either one or the other in isolation. In other words, we talk about what Christ has done for us as one topic. Then we talk about some matter of morals as a separate topic. But in our efforts to keep justification and sanctification (faith and life) in their proper places—that is, to properly divide God’s Word of Truth—we lose sight of how intimately bound together they are.

The apostles did not divide things like that, even though the division is always apparent in their writings. Their books speak about Christ’s work for us, and woven into their gospel is encouragement to live for the Lord. Their books speak about how Christians should live, but all their discussions about life are sprinkled with reminders of what we have become in Christ. The law, the gospel, and our life in Christ are all interwoven. Nothing is omitted. Everything is in perfect balance. Nothing is slighted. These writers could only have been speaking under inspiration of the Holy Spirit, for mere human beings could never speak as perfectly as they did. What a blessing when pastors, in their sermons and Bible studies, imitate the apostles’ way of speaking and when all God’s people learn to speak that way in conversations with fellow Christians. Hopefully this book will help us arrive at this goal.

The fourth reason for this book is that there is a dark side to the struggle for piety. We have a sinful nature that is quite

proficient at taking good pursuits.in a wrong direction. A person can want to become pious so fervently, to put away a sin so much, to be so greatly concerned about doing the right thing for the Lord, that he or she begins to search for piety in an impious way.

We will offer a few more thoughts on this point in the final section. But I think it is important to keep this thought in the back of our minds as we think about our own growth in faith. What should be our reasons for growth? Does the gospel really motivate us as we think about what we should do in our lives? Or does the law play a role that it ought not play, leading us to do the right thing for some reason disassociated from the gospel? This book will touch on this theme several times, but for the most part it will be in the background. I think it is enough that we are aware that there is a dark side to piety and then watch how Scripture creates a piety that flows freely from the many-sided gospel.

Hopefully this book will help us develop a healthy view of why we as Christians should strive for piety. This author has no corner on piety. But it is just this lack that has led me to explore the Scripture references in this book. And that is what you will find here—Scripture. This book is not profound in thought. But it is filled with God’s Word that, in a simple way, leads us to our goal of life and service in God’s kingdom.

Each chapter looks at some aspect of the gospel and shows how it is used in Scripture to encourage us to serve the Lord. In the narrow sense, the gospel is God’s work of forgiving the sins of the world and reconciling the world to himself in Christ. Here we widen the term a bit and use it to refer to all the good things God does for us in Christ.

The passages offered here are not the only passages that encourage us to serve the Lord or direct us into some aspect of service. The New Testament is filled with instructions on how to live to please the Lord. Nor are they the only passages that speak about the gospel. There are longer sections that speak about the gospel in more detail (for example, Romans 3-5), where sanctification is not in the writers’ minds. We must never lose sight of these passages, for they lay the foundation for the passages we will consider in this book. The gospel pas-

sages we have chosen to focus on here are all in close proximity to the writer’s encouragement to sanctification. They have been chosen in order to show how the writers weave the gospel into virtually everything they say about our lives in Christ. We will primarily use passages from the New Testament epistles, but we will not limit ourselves to them.

The chapter divisions will help organize the material, but they should not be construed as scriptural divisions. As we go through this study, you may find other aspects of the many-faceted way Scripture links our faith and life. In passages quoted from Scripture, where appropriate, I will highlight the aspect of sanctification the apostle has in mind with italics and highlight the gospel motivation in bold type. I hope you will sit alongside me at the feet of Jesus and the apostles, and together we will learn something of the art of gospel motivation.
