# Chapter 3: The Gospel of Slavery to Righteousness

Romans 6:14-23

There are times in a Christian’s life when it appears that he or she may be sitting on the fence, serving both the Lord and the sinful flesh. In fact, at times every Christian appears to be doing that. At these times we become confused. Maybe we doubt our Christianity. Maybe we doubt God, thinking he has let us drift in our sins. Maybe we consider giving up. After all, Jesus said, “No one can serve two masters. Either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and Money” (Matthew 6:24). We wonder which master is really riding us.

Paul concludes the first:section of Romans 6 with these words: “Sin shall not be your master, because you are not under law, but under grace” (verse 14). At hearing this, the sinful nature perks up its ears. The sinful nature is looking for every excuse it can to find sin. Paul’s talk about not being under the law and living in the light of God’s grace and forgiveness seems to provide such an excuse. If we do not live under the law and are given God’s grace, then we have free reign to sin, right? Wrong. It’s just the opposite. Paul explains why, and in the process he gives us one of the most powerful reasons why we serve the Lord.

The point of Romans 6:14-23 is simple. By God’s grace we have become slaves to righteousness. Paul starts out by saying:

Don’t you know that when you offer yourselves to someone to obey him as slaves, you are slaves to the one whom you obey—whether you are slaves to sin, which leads to death, or to obedience, which leads to righteousness? (6:16)

Two options. That’s all there is. It may seem that we can sit on the fence, but we really can’t. Slavery is a fact of life. There is no such thing as freedom from a master who controls your thoughts and actions. Before Christ there was only one master, one thing that rode our hearts, and that was sin. And when the rider Sin controlled the reins of our lives, we found ourselves plummeting into the abyss of eternal death.

But when we were brought to faith, we found out that another rider wants to ride us—and he does ride us. This is Jesus Christ. There is something else to which we can be slaves: “to obedience, which leads to righteousness.” This is perhaps the hardest phrase in this section to understand. It doesn’t really form a parallel with the first phrase, “slaves to sin, which leads to death.” Our first reaction is to make the two phrases parallel. “Sin” in the first phrase is interpreted as sinning, and “obedience” in the second phrase is interpreted as doing the right thing. Sinning leads to death; doing the right thing leads to righteousness. This interpretation is not necessarily wrong. Yet we might consider another interpretation. We will do this in the next several paragraphs and then offer a summary. These are perhaps the most technical para-

graphs in the book. Yet understanding the two phrases “sin, which leads to death” and “obedience, which leads to righteousness” are crucial to understanding the gospel of slavery to righteousness.

In verses 16 through 18, the key words are “obedience” (obey), and “righteousness.” Verse 17 helps us understand the meaning of “obedience.” In verse 17 Paul is clearly speaking about something his readers did in the past. They “wholeheartedly obeyed the form of teaching to which [they] were entrusted.” In the word obey, Paul is clearly referring to faith. Using the word obey in this way may sound strange to us, but it is perfectly normal for Paul. To come to faith is the “obedience” of faith. It is to obey God when he tells us to give up our own righteousness and submit ourselves to finding our hope in the righteousness Christ has won for us. In Romans 10:3,4, Paul explains the tragic mistake of the Jewish people in general: “Since they did not know the righteousness that comes from God and sought to establish their own, they did not submit to God’s righteousness. Christ is the end of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes.” Faith, therefore, can be spoken of as an act of obedience in which God, through his Holy Spirit, enables us to see our complete unworthiness to stand before him and humbly submit to his way of finding access to him.

Getting back to Romans 6, we understand “obedience” in verse 17 to be faith. It is obedience to the “form of teaching,” which is the gospel message; it is obedience “to which you were entrusted” by God’s grace. This obedience leads to righteousness, Christ’s righteousness, and it makes us “slaves to righteousness” (verse 18).

Martin Franzmann, in his commentary on Romans, writes concerning verse 16:

The alternative to [the slavery to sin] is a slavery too. Paul calls it, rather strangely, a slavery to obedience. This “obedience” is the religious act which Paul has previously called “the obedience of faith” and of which he will speak again in the next verse. It is the basic surrender of man’s liberated will to the call and claim of God, the source of all concrete acts of obedience to His will; it “leads to righteousness” and

therefore to life (cf. 1:17;:6:23) (Romans: A Commentary, St. Louis: Concordia, 1968, p. 117.)

That Paul is talking about the obedience of faith, which gives us a new status before God in Christ, becomes clear in verse 22. There Paul speaks about our being slaves to righteousness as being “slaves to God,” who has called us to faith. This is the contrast Paul wants to make. Either we are slaves to sin (which we commit) or slaves to righteousness (which we have as a gift).

At this point the emphasis is on the thing to which we are slaves, not so much the actions we do as slaves. We can say, “’m a slave to Mr. Smith.” Or we can say, “I’m a slave to picking cotton.” The two refer to the same thing, but the first stresses the one who dictates my actions, and the other stresses what the master wants me to do. In Romans 6:15 and following, Paul is stressing the one who owns me. These two phrases we have been looking at in verse 16 can be summarized as follows: My owner is either the principle of sin in my sinful flesh, which always reacts to God’s law by doing the opposite of what God wants. Or it is a life filled with the righteousness of Christ, which frees me from the law and drives me forward into a life of righteousness.

In verses 14-23, then, Paul is talking about the status we have before God. Either we live our lives in the same status we had when we were born, namely, in slavery to sin, or we live in the new status that God has given us, in slavery to Christ’s righteousness, which God has given us as a gift. So Paul is proceeding in the same way he did in the first section of chapter 6. He talked there about a status we have with God. In verses 1-14 it was being joined with Christ’s death through Baptism and rising with him into a new life free from sin. Here it is a change of masters, in which God freed us from the slave-master of sin and taught us to believe in Christ, to be filled with his righteousness and to be slaves to that righteousness. What Baptism did for us is paralleled by what the Word does for us. Baptism and the Word are both channels of God’s grace; God is the agent, and we are the recipients. Through Baptism and faith in the Word of forgiveness, we have received a new status whose liberating power

provides both the reason and the motive for serving God. In both cases Paul is unfolding for us the simple gospel message and showing in concrete terms the implications of faith in this gospel.

In the first half of Romans 6, Paul urged sanctified living like this: “Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body” (verse 12). In the second half of Romans 6, Paul encourages us like this:

Just as you used to offer the parts of your body in slavery to impurity and to ever-increasing wickedness, so now offer them in slavery to righteousness leading to holiness. When you were slaves to sin, you were free from the contro! of righteousness. What benefit did you reap at that time from the things you are now ashamed of? Those things result in death! But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves to God, the benefit you reap leads to holiness, and the result is eternal life. (6:19-22)

This is nothing other than what Jesus said in Matthew 6:24: “No one can serve two masters. Either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other.” Slavery to sin leads to ever-increasing wickedness and, finally, to death. Slavery to righteousness leads to holiness of life, and the end of this kind of life on earth is eternal life in heaven. This is true gospel motivation. What power lies in these words!

Paul concludes this section with a beautiful verse, one many Christians memorize: “The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord” (6:23). Slavery to righteousness—slavery to God—does not earn anything for us. In the previous verse, the NIV translates, “The benefit you reap leads to holiness, and the result is eternal life.” The word result may give a person the wrong impression. A result is the outcome of what I do. What I do has a bearing on the result. The NIV translation may lead someone to think that what he or she does in slavery to God causes the result, eternal life, to happen. The Greek word is much more neutral. It is most often translated “end.” In other words, the “end” of life lived in slavery to God is eternal life.

Paul clears up any misunderstanding in the last verse of the chapter. Slavery to sin will earn its wages: eternal death. It does indeed cause its result. But slavery to righteousness and to God is a gift of God. He entrusted to us the message of the gospel; he gave us righteousness and made us slaves to it; he established the “end” of our lives as his slaves—eternal life. We all must admit that we are unworthy slaves (Luke 17:10; NIV translates as “servants”) and acknowledge that the “end” of our slavery, eternal life, is a gift of God.

Paul uses this concept of slavery later in Romans 7:25. We will look at that in another chapter. Unlike his discussion of dying and living with Christ and his next discussion about the freedom of the Spirit (7:1-6), Paul does not use the picture of slavery elsewhere in his letters. In 6:19 he told the Romans, “I put this in human terms because you are weak in your natural selves.” Perhaps Paul’s use of “human terms” was suitable for what he wanted to tell the Romans, but it did not fit well into other contexts.

Nevertheless, the concept of Christian slavery to God is found throughout Scripture (see Hebrews 2:14,15 and 2 Peter 2:19), and all discussions of sanctification imply that how we live is not ours to decide. Paul called himself a slave of Christ in Romans 1:1, Philippians 1:1, and Titus 1:1. The NIV translates the Greek word as “servant.” Perhaps the translators wanted to avoid the negative connotation of the word slave. Whatever their reasons, the translation “servant” in these passages doesn’t do justice to Paul’s thought. A servant is someone who can choose whom he wants to work for. He can come and go for the day; he has time off and can enjoy vacations. He gets paid for his work. A slave, on the other hand, is bound to one person, without pay, every minute of his life. He cannot choose a different master. That’s how Paul saw himself in relation to God. He was not a servant; he was a slave.

That’s what we are too. And what a wonderful slavery it is! Imagine you had a stockbroker who was always right in his investment advice. He was so good that he gained 50 percent a year on your investments. Whatever stock he told you to invest in was always a winner. What’s more, this broker

promised that he would never go off looking for a client with deeper pockets and leave you to your own decisions. He would stay with you forever. All you had to do was shape all your thinking and strategies around him and his advice. In effect, he wanted you to become his slave. Would you buck at that kind of slavery? Would you resent being a slave to that kind of person? J wouldn't.

That’s what it’s like being a slave to God. He has given you his righteousness, which lays the foundation for a life of peace now and a life in his presence in eternity. He promises that all things will work out for your good as you walk the road to eternal life. He daily blesses you with good things. You are completely protected from the power of sin as long as you live under his care. Who will buck at that kind of slavery? Who will resent giving their lives as slaves to that kind of person? This is slavery stripped of all negative connotations. This is slavery a person can be proud of. There should be lines of people waiting to become slaves of such a master.

Thoughts on head and heart knowledge

There is an issue we must face when it comes to gospel motivation. Pastors and teachers especially should be concerned about this, but all Christians should be concerned about it too. It’s one of those issues—actually it is a way of talking—that is naturally cleared up when a person understands gospel motivation. The statement comes in two forms. First, the statement is made that if we are going to have an effect on people’s lives, we have to speak not just to their heads but to their hearts as well. Or, Christianity is not just head knowledge; it is heart knowledge. Second, the statement is made that if Christian teachers are going to have an influence, they must teach people not just so their heads are filled with knowledge but so they are moved to action.

But how do we speak to the head and to the heart? How do we teach so that we effect a change in a person? I have to admit that the whole distinction between head and heart knowledge puzzles me. Or to use another term that is used to describe good teaching today, I am really not sure how I should be teaching “affectively.”

How did Paul teach? Remember, the section at which we have been looking (Romans 6) is at the heart of his teaching about the Christian life. If there is any place he should be teaching to the heart, and if there is any place he should be teaching “affectively,” it is here. So how does he do it? He appeals to what we know. He amplifies on the gospel that all of us hold dear. Notice how many times he appeals to what we know (for Western-audiences, what we have stored in our head): “Don’t you know” (verse 3); “for we know” (verse 6); “we believe” (verse 8); “for we know” (verse 9); “count yourselves” (verse 11); “don’t you know” (verse 16); “you wholeheartedly obeyed the form of teaching” (verse 17). Paul appeals to what his readers know, and he expands on their knowledge; he explains what the gospel means and describes in vivid terms the status we have as people who obey the gospel.

If we are to learn anything from Paul’s method of encouraging sanctification, it is this: Explain the gospel and expand on the gospel. Describe in as many ways as you can what the gospel means for that Christian friend who needs to be built up in the faith. “What does the gospel mean for you? This is what it means... .” “What have you become as one who believes the gospel? This is what you have become... .” “How should you live as a child of God? This is how you should live, and as I explain this to you, I will also tell you why you should live this way.”

If there is just criticism that Christian teachers appeal too much to the head and not enough to the heart, it has nothing to do with their manner of speaking, their sincerity, their body language, or any of that. It may be that too much Bible study time is wasted on biblical facts or on a close examination of the laws of God. Too much time is spent on side matters in order to avoid wrestling with the gospel and, through it, seeing the depth of God’s love for us. (This is a strong statement, I know. But forgive me, dear reader, for I am speaking to myself if not to you.) If we mine the depth of Scripture and ask the Lord to teach us through those words to better know our inheritance in Christ, we will never be speaking merely to the head but always to the heart as well.

The sad thing about speaking of head versus heart when we talk about motivating Christians to action is that the head always comes up short. Yet knowledge, cognitive perception, of the gospel is what we need above all else, and shortchanging the mind may be setting up a roadblock to the very thing that alone will lead us to grow to live as God’s willing slaves. Scripture does indeed make a distinction between heart and mind. Jesus said, “Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul] and with all your mind and with all your strength” (Mark 12:30). Yet analyze this verse from Paul:

I pray also that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints. (Ephesians 1:18)

It is hard to separate head and heart in that passage. To know the hope to which the Lord has called us is to have hearts filled with a desire to please the Lord. Or consider this passage:

I pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power through his Spirit in your inner being, so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. And I pray that you, being rooted and established in love, may have power, together with all the saints, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ, and to know this love that surpasses knowledge—that you may be filled to the measure of all the fullness of God. (Ephesians 3:16)

That pretty much says it all. We are doing our work as Christian teachers if we lead people into the depth of the gospel and then pray that God use our words to strengthen our hearers, praying that the Lord will establish them in his love so that they can understand that love to its furthest limit. Then we will reach the heart, mind, emotions, will, personality, and whatever other categories we may assign to the spiritual side of our beings.

To encourage teachers to speak to the head and heart may have its place. But it seems more constructive simply to exam-

ine sections of Scripture like Romans 6 and pattern our preaching and teaching on Paul’s way of speaking. Doing that, we will cover all the bases.
