# Chapter 7: The Gospel of the Kingdom

The gospel of the kingdom is closely tied together with Jewish history. If you had asked a child of Jesus’ day what he hoped would happen in his lifetime, he would have said, “I want the kingdom to be restored to Israel.”

The child’s hope would have pleased God. God had promised Israel this would happen. The child’s wish was a statement of faith in the gospel.

We won't spend a lot of time in the Old Testament explaining the history of this hope. But a few notes will help us understand what every Jewish believer was looking forward to. This, in turn, will help us see how we are involved in the fulfillment of this hope.

Ever since the people of Israel left Egypt, they were harassed by one foreign nation after another. Most of Israel’s

problems were its own fault. They stemmed from Israel’s rebellion against God. For some three hundred years after the Israelites entered the Promised Land, God had to chasten them for worshiping the idols of the nations around them.

In time, the Israelites asked God for a king. They wanted a leader they could see and rally around, someone who would lead them into battle. God’s care was not good enough for them, nor were his battle plans to their liking. After letting the people know that in asking for a king, Israel was rejecting him, God agreed.

Life under Israel’s kings did not really improve Israel’s winloss rate against foreign invaders. Because Israel continued to serve idols, the Lord continued.to leave its boundaries open to foreign invaders. Israel continued to be oppressed by neighboring powers. This continued until Jesus’ time, when the foreign oppressor was Rome.

Yet during one very special period, Israel experienced a remarkable time of godliness and growth. This was under the second king of Israel, David. David was a God-fearing man, and the Lord blessed Israel under his rule. Israel’s boundaries were extended as far as they ever would be. Under David, the Lord completely fulfilled his promise to Abraham to give his descendants all the land from Egypt north to the Euphrates River. It was a wonderful time for Israel. It lived in peace. Its king was concerned not only for its physical needs but for its spiritual needs as well. These blessings continued into the early years of the reign of David’s son Solomon. Solomon too served the Lord and gave Israel strong spiritual leadership, particularly through his completion of the Lord’s temple in Jerusalem.

This period of peace and prosperity was brief. But it gave Israel a glimpse into the future, to the time of an even greater kingdom. David and his kingdom served as a reference point, something the Israelites could relate to when they were told to look into the future to another time of peace and prosperity. From the time of David until God’s kingdom was finally ushered in, God’s prophets pointed the people ahead to this perfect kingdom. What Israel could not obtain because of its sins, the Lord himself would establish in his undeserved love. The

prophet told the people that a king would come from David’s line. Typical of all the prophecies of that day, Isaiah said:

For to us a child is born, to us a son is given, and the government will be on his shoulders. And he will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there will be no end. He will reign on David’s throne and over his kingdom, establishing and upholding it with justice and righteousness from that time on and forever. The zeal of the Lorp Almighty will accomplish this. (Isaiah 9:6,7)

A kingdom with unlimited boundaries. A kingdom that would never end. A king who was none other than God himself. This the Lord would bring about by his own zeal.

The people waited. Most looked forward to a kingdom. But it was not clear to them what the kingdom would be like. Many, probably most, viewed this kingdom only in physical terms. They wanted someone to free them from the Persians, then the Greeks, and finally the Romans. They expected someone to lead Israel in battle, give it power to defeat its enemies, and then establish Jewish rule throughout the world. That’s what the Jews saw in Jesus when he fed the hungry and healed the sick. That’s what puzzled them when Jesus spoke about humility, love, and his own death on the cross. That’s what they saw in Jesus when he entered Jerusalem on Palm Sunday. That’s what destroyed their expectations when they saw him die on a cross five days later.

Yet some in Israel saw the situation clearly. When Zechariah (the father of John the Baptist, who was to announce that the King had arrived), thought ahead to Jesus, he defined Jesus’ kingship like this:

[God] has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David (as he said through his holy prophets of long ago), salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us—to show mercy to our fathers and to remember his holy covenant, the oath he swore to our father Abraham: to rescue us from the hand of our enemies, and to enable us to serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all our days. (Luke 1:69-75)

Zechariah realized how his son, John, would prepare the people to receive this King. He would give God’s people “the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins” (Luke 1:77). Salvation would not come through armies but through the forgiveness of sins. The kingdom itself would be built around Jesus’ forgiveness, and because of that it would be radically different from a kingdom built by the weapons of human warfare. People like Zechariah, John, and others realized the true nature of Jesus’ kingdom. They understood how that kingdom would be established and how it would spread.

For three years Jesus worked to encourage and nurture those who understood the true nature of the kingdom he came to establish. He rebuked those who misunderstood the prophets and tried to enlighten them. He wanted them to see him for the King he was. He wanted them to become members of his kingdom. That is why John the Baptist’s work was so important. He gave the people a head start on understanding Jesus. Otherwise, Jesus would have had to start from scratch and testify about himself. Matthew starts his account of John the Baptist by saying, “In those days John the Baptist came, preaching in the Desert of Judea and saying, ‘Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near’” (Matthew 3:1,2).

The word near, as the NIV translates it, can be misleading. The KJV translates the Greek word “at hand.” Near implies that something is close but has not arrived. “At hand” states that something has arrived. That is what John was sent to do. John wanted to tell his people that the kingdom of God, for which they had been waiting many years, had now arrived. The King was here.

Yet confusion and controversy reigned. In some ways Jesus looked like a budding earthly king. In other ways he seemed to be the opposite. Even John the Baptist, who was chosen by God to herald the King’s coming, was confused. “By now,” he thought, “I should be feasting with the King, sharing his power, and making decisions on his behalf.” But within a few short months after announcing the arrival of the King, he found himself rotting in the prison of another king, a wicked king named Herod, whose whole life was opposed to God.

John was apparently so troubled at Jesus’ apparent lack of success that he sent some of his own disciples to Jesus with the question, “Are you the one who was to come, or should we expect someone else?” (Matthew 11:3). Jesus pointed to what he was doing—things the prophets said the coming King would do—and said:

Go back and report to John what you hear and see: The blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cured, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is preached to the poor. Blessed is the man who does not fall away on account of me. (Matthew 11:4-6)

Blessed is the person, Jesus was saying, who does not expect a different sort of king than me, miss my kingship, and lose the kingdom of God. No, the kingdom of God has arrived.

Jesus’ miracles proved that the kingdom of God was at hand. When he sent out his disciples to preach and teach in the towns and villages, he told them, “As you go, preach this message: ‘The kingdom of heaven is near [at hand].’ Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse those who have leprosy, drive out demons” (Matthew 10:7,8). When the disciples returned from their preaching tour, they were amazed that the demons were subject to them. Jesus rejoiced over their work but put things into perspective by reminding them, “However, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven” (Luke 10:20).

Once when Jesus was driving out demons, the Pharisees accused him of driving out demons by Satan’s power. He said, “If J drive out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you” (Matthew 12:28).

Often we point to Jesus’ miracles as proof that he is the Son of God. The miracles certainly prove that. But Jesus also performed miracles to demonstrate that the kingdom long awaited in Israel had come. The time of waiting was over. The Son of God had arrived with the power and compassion to heal, to calm storms, to feed masses of people, to raise the dead, and to cast out demons. Jesus’ miracles were mighty acts to some people, but to a Jewish believer waiting for the Messiah and his kingdom, the miracles were proof that the

Messiah had arrived and the kingdom would once again belong to God’s people. Miracles were kingdom events.

So were Jesus’ words. Consider Jesus’ parables. The parables were more than “earthly stories with heavenly meanings.” To the disciples, who would spearhead the advance of the kingdom after Jesus returned to heaven, the parables were (or would soon become) their instruction manual on how the kingdom operated. They revealed what the disciples could expect as workers in the kingdom.

The kingdom is like a sower who has various results when he sows the seed. The disciples would find the same results when they sowed the seed of the Word. Face this reality, Jesus said. The kingdom of heaven is like seed that falls where it may, and you have no power over what happens to it after it is sown. But you can be sure that some of it will fall on rich ground and that it will grow. The kingdom is like a treasure in a field. Don’t be so concerned about convincing people of the value of your message, Jesus taught his disciples. People will give up everything they have to obtain the treasure you hold out to them. The kingdom of God is like a man who sows seed in his field. Then, as he sits back and watches it grow, he has no idea how it is growing. He even sleeps, and do you know what? It still grows. Yes, the disciples could sleep in peace amidst the rigors of kingdom work.

By these parables the Lord taught the disciples and us what working in the kingdom is like. But even more to the point of what we are saying in this chapter is that the parables teach us that God’s kingdom has indeed come. The disciples would soon carry on their master’s work of causing the kingdom to grow.

The teaching about God’s kingdom is a large subject. For our present purposes, it is enough to say that when God’s kingdom came, God’s people knew they had eternal protection from their enemies; they had everything they needed for their bodies and souls; they had God’s blessing on every aspect of their lives; and they had a future secure in the knowledge that God was always with them. They knew that Satan could never harm them. In this kingdom they found every reason to serve the Lord.

True, there is very much a future aspect to God’s kingdom, and the New Testament often refers to the glory of God’s eternal kingdom. But when Jesus arrived, the kingdom arrived with him. Everything he did and said was based on his coming victory over Satan, which he would win through his death on the cross and seal with his resurrection. Every good thing belonged to the disciples right then and would be theirs forever.

One of the most difficult things for early Jewish Christians to absorb was that God’s kingdom was open to Gentiles as well as Jews. The political understanding of the kingdom precluded this. After all, if the Jews were to rule the world, who would they rule except the Gentiles? It took some time before the church realized that what set Jew apart from Gentile, namely, God’s Old Testament law, had been done away with in Christ and that both Jews and Gentiles could be part of a nonpolitical kingdom, a kingdom in which believers were joined with Christ, ruling over the kingdom of Satan in whatever way his kingdom tried to exert its power over them. At a council in Jerusalem some years after Jesus ascended into heaven, the church used a pointed kingdom prophecy to clarify its position. The church must not make it difficult for the Gentiles to become part of Christ’s kingdom, as it was prophesied by Amos in the Old Testament:

After this I will return and rebuild David’s fallen tent. Its ruins I will rebuild, and I will restore it, that the remnant of men may seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles who bear my name, says the Lord. (Acts 15:16,17, quoting Amos 9:11,12)

So what does this all mean? It means that Jesus’ kingdom was not the political kingdom many of the Jews expected. And a good thing it wasn’t. A political kingdom would have helped only a part of the people of the world—the Jews. It would have excluded the Gentiles. A political kingdom would have solved only some of the people’s problems—earthly problems. It would have given them freedom from oppression, a good standard of living, health, and hope for a future on earth. But a political kingdom would never have solved eternal problems, the problem of sin and our need for peace with God.

om

The good news is that Jesus established a kingdom that was perfect and complete. In his kingdom the thing that separated Jews and Gentiles, the law, was fulfilled and became obsolete. The kingdom was open to all people. Oppression had come to an end. In heaven the enemies of God’s people are shut out from the city where God’s people live. His kingdom provides freedom from the worst oppressor, the devil, whose weapons have led people into the grip of sin and hell. Through Jesus’ victory on the cross, where the law was nullified, where guilt was removed, and where the forgiveness of sins was ushered in, we have access to God’s love and grace. Jesus established a kingdom that gives us a place where all our physical needs will finally be met, namely, a new heaven and earth.

With this in mind, we can return to our topic of gospel motivation. The message of the kingdom helps us understand all Jesus’ teachings. Everything he taught and did was set in the context of the kingdom. The kingdom of God, properly understood, is a huge, overarching concept that includes every possible blessing God wants to give us. It includes justification by faith, the gift of Christ’s righteousness, God’s care and guidance, and the church’s victory over its enemies. It includes weapons to fight off Satan’s attacks and the promise of ultimate dominion over his empire. It includes God’s power to turn every hardship into victory, every need into a tool for greater growth in faith, and every joy into a reason to praise God. It provides the way we can pass through God’s judgment and into his eternal kingdom.

Keeping these truths in mind, let’s consider the Sermon on the Mount. The Sermon on the Mount has been used in various ways. Often it is used as a catalog of laws that Christians are to keep. At worst it is interpreted as the method Jesus gave us to find salvation. At best it is viewed as an example of the third use of the law, namely, to help believers know what to do in their lives of faith.

When it is viewed in the context of the kingdom, though, we find it no different than Paul’s sermons, in which he weaves the gospel into his every admonition and encouragement. Everything Jesus tells us to do in this sermon is infused with gospel motivation.

Consider the beginning of the Sermon on the Mount. The eight Beatitudes contain encouragement for Jesus’ disciples, who live with an entirely different outlook and spirit than the world. Because of this, the world looks down on them and persecutes them. The Lord comforts his people by telling them about the Lord’s great blessing on their faith. Six of the Beatitudes contain promises of what the Lord will give his people. Two of them, however, tell us what the Lord is giving us right now. Those are the first and the last, which tell us that as God’s people the kingdom is ours. It is a striking way of organizing the Beatitudes. It is almost as if Jesus bracketed all of God’s rewards with the most all-encompassing one, the kingdom, which is a present reality and possession of those who serve the Lord.

Those who listened to the sermon (and we who read it today) were hearing everything Jesus said in light of the gospel. “You are the salt of the earth. ... You are the light of the world” (Matthew 5:13,14). That’s Jesus’ way of saying that we are new creatures. If we let our salt become flat or hide our lights under a bushel basket, we are shutting Christ out of our hearts and giving up our place in the kingdom.

You are members of my kingdom, Jesus says, so things will be different for you than for those who are not in my kingdom. You are serving the one who has fulfilled every command and every prophecy ever uttered. In my kingdom you are already considered righteous and holy. For this reason, you don’t have to curtail the scope of God’s law as your religious leaders are doing by paring it down to size so that it fits your ability to keep it. No, those who are great in my kingdom—who really understand what it means to be a member of it and who put this into practice—teach others to do everything God wills. Why? Because where there might be failure, there is always forgiveness. And where there is obedience, it is done by God’s power in Christ and to his glory. Your righteousness must be greater than the piecemeal, external righteousness of the Pharisees and teachers of the law. It must be whole and complete (and as the light and salt of the world, it will be), otherwise your end will be like theirs.

After this, Jesus compares and contrasts the righteousness of those in the kingdom with those outside of the kingdom.

Murder, anger, slander, the proper spirit of making an offering, adultery, divorce, swearing, sin in one’s life, taking oaths, revenge, lawsuits, unreasonable imposition, and love for enemies are all topics Jesus wants his people to view in light of their citizenship in heaven. His people don’t have to cut out of the law what they can’t do, for they live under forgiving grace. We want to serve our King with all our heart, soul, and mind. We can love our enemies because our King can replace anything our enemies might unjustly take from us. For this same reason, we don’t have to drag people into court. We don’t have to gain satisfaction with anger, cursing, or hatred. God wants our enemies also to become part of his kingdom, and we may be the instruments he uses. We don't have to struggle to get out of an oppressive marriage, for our King is our solace and comfort. We don’t have to back up our promises with oaths, since we know that as part of God’s kingdom, we will be truthful like our King. You see the point. We are motivated to read and observe Jesus’ instruction in the Sermon on the Mount because we are in a special kingdom ruled over by a special King. It is a rule that those outside the kingdom can’t even imagine.

We can do our works of piety in secret, since we are looking for our King’s approval and don’t have to scramble for approval of the people of this world. We can pray with simplicity because a simple prayer is all that a gracious God asks for. We pray for spiritual blessings almost exclusively, since we know that as we do this, our King will provide everything else we need in life. Because our King has not judged, we do not judge others. We deal patiently with the faults of others, just as our King has dealt patiently with us. We pray with confidence because our King is our provider. We enter through the narrow gate of repentance and faith in the King who died for us, and we seek to serve him. We avoid the wide gate of self-righteousness and all the legal nitpicking that accompanies it.

Jesus’ teaching astounded the crowds, not because he was so profound but because he spoke as someone who knew the power of the gospel of the kingdom and could speak to his subjects as objects of his grace and forgiveness.

When you read Jesus’ words in the Sermon on the Mount, cover it with the gospel of the kingdom and you will find all the motivation you need to keep Jesus’ words. You will also learn how the gospel of the kingdom infuses every aspect of our lives. Here is wisdom stemming from the love and power of our King.

We might say the same thing about the book of James. James does not have a lot of overt gospel motivation. But it is set in the same context as the Sermon on the Mount. James wrote to a similar audience, namely, Jewish people who had come to believe that Jesus had established God’s kingdom but now needed encouragement to continue serving the Lord.

Let’s finish this chapter with a few of Saint Paul’s references to the kingdom. Paul did not use this concept as much as he used other concepts, perhaps because he was speaking mostly to Gentiles. The kingdom is primarily a Jewish concept. Nevertheless, as a Jew himself, Paul saw his message in kingdom terms. In fact, his entire message could be summarized as the gospel of the kingdom. The last thing Luke wrote about Paul was this:

For two whole years Paul stayed there in his own rented house and welcomed all who came to see him. Boldly and without hindrance he preached the kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus Christ. (Acts 28:30,31)

Paul refers to the kingdom of God about eight times in his letters. Sometimes he refers to the heavenly kingdom we will someday inherit. But sometimes he reminds us that we are living in the kingdom of God.

Paul uses the term in a very striking way when he speaks about “strong” Christians dealing with “weak” Christians. Strong Christians are those who can apply the freedom they have in Christ in choosing how they want to serve the Lord. Weak Christians are those who feel conscience-bound to worship God using some particular custom, perhaps one they learned when they were younger, and they can’t shake themselves loose from thinking that their way is the only right way to serve. Paul addresses the strong Christian and says:

The kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit,

because anyone who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and approved by men. (Romans 14:17,18)

Should we bicker about this custom or that custom? Should we force people into our mode because technically we are right and they are wrongly bound by customs God does not demand that we use? No. The most important thing is service to Christ that flows from hearts in which the Spirit is working. Although the kingdom is God’s rule over us, there is almost a spatial element to the kingdom, a “place” where we are living with fellow believers. In this place, it does not matter what we eat or what we drink but whether we are walking righteously before the Lord; it’s a matter of resting in the peace we have in Christ’s forgiveness and being filled with joy through the Holy Spirit because we are children of God. Paul knows that when we remember what this kingdom is like, we will shape our lives around it.

In Colossians 1 Paul encourages us to live lives worthy of the Lord, to please him, to bear fruit, to grow in knowing Christ, and to give thanks to God in a spirit of joy. He does not just tell us to do these things, but he also reminds us about what God has done for us. Notice how he calls the kingdom of God the kingdom of light, in contrast to the kingdom of darkness, Satan’s kingdom, out of which we have been rescued. God has filled this new kingdom with his blessings. There we live with his Son, whom he loves. There we are bought back from sin and death through the forgiveness of sins.

We pray this in order that you may live a life worthy of the Lord and may please him in every way: bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of God, being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may have great endurance and patience, and joyfully giving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of the saints in the kingdom of light. For he has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son he loves, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins. (Colossians 1:10-14)

What we do for God is woven together with the gospel of what he has done for us in bringing us into his kingdom.

In his first letter, Peter uses a similar picture. He calls us a people belonging to God. We are chosen; we are royalty; we are a holy nation. Each of these terms describes what it means to be members of God’s kingdom.

You are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light. Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God; once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy. Dear friends, I urge you, as aliens and strangers in the world, to abstain from sinful desires, which war against your soul. (1 Peter 2:9-11)

Notice the gospel concepts heaped one on top of the other. They lead us to praise the Lord and abstain from sinning while we live in this world.

Luther had it right when he said in the Small Catechism: “All this he did that I should be his own, and live under him in his kingdom, and serve him in everlasting righteousness, innocence, and blessedness.” And we think of his famous hymn “A Mighty Fortress.” In the fourth stanza, he wrote, “And take they our life, goods, fame, child, and wife, let these all be gone, they yet have nothing won; the Kingdom ours remaineth” (The Lutheran Hymnal 262:4).
