# Chapter 11: Special Examples, Part 1

In the previous chapters we looked at gospel motivation according to themes. In this chapter we will look at longer sections of Scripture and focus on the particular lack of sanctification the Bible writer was trying to correct and how he worked to correct it.

The ultimate goal of God’s plan of salvation is to restore us to the perfection and fellowship we had with him in the Garden of Eden. Yet if that was all he wanted for us, he would have taken us to heaven as soon as we came to faith in Christ. Could God accomplish his plan if he did that? Not really. The Lord wants a body of believers to exist in this world so the

faith can be passed down from one generation to the next. As children of God, we are called to be the light of the world and salt of the earth. Our own sanctification dovetails with God’s plan for us, for our congregations, for the world, and, ultimately, for his own glory.

Accordingly, the Bible is not a dogmatics book, in which the teachings of the Christian faith are laid out in systematic order and in which sanctification is discussed particularly in its relation to justification. The New Testament is God’s call to holiness in Christ and to holy living. He makes us his children and then calls us to live in line with what we are. Accordingly, much of the New Testament was written because there were problems im the church or because there was a need to strengthen a particular group of Christians. Even the so-called chief doctrinal book of the New Testament, Romans, was written to strengthen the Roman Christians so they could provide a base of support for Paul when he did mission work in Spain. Many of the beautiful Bible passages we learned in confirmation class, which were set in the context of a doctrinal topic, are actually found in passages that are teaching and encouraging sanctification. For example, many of the beautiful statements of Jesus recorded in the gospel of John were spoken in rebuke of the Pharisees and teachers of the law. In fact, most of John’s gospel—and remember, John is the “apostle of love’—is comprised of Jesus rebuking and trying to correct his enemies.

The Bible is a book about living in holiness to the Lord. How we became holy in Christ is where it all starts. His victory over Satan and his forgiveness of our sins make us heirs of eternal life. We are called on to live lives as God’s people. The world offers many alternatives and tries to force those alternatives on God’s people through persecution of one sort or another. And so do the spiritual powers of darkness. They provide a myriad of other spirits to supplant the Holy Spirit. They take contro] of the leaders of nations who make false teachings the religion of the land and then make life intolerable for God’s people. :

In answer to this, Jesus and his writers urge us to hold on to our faith and live as God’s people. They urge us to maintain

our loyalty to Christ and his chosen apostles. They urge us to follow God’s will. They tell us they are praying for us. And in the process, they provide a beautiful pattern for us when we do the same for our fellow believers. That pattern is what this present book is about. The Lutheran church has sometimes been charged with preaching more justification than sanctification. Sadly, some who are concerned about this solve the problem by talking more about morality, perhaps even cutting back on repeating the basic gospel message. But this problem, if it exists, is easily solved. Working through books of the Bible as they stand, submitting to their agenda and merely seeking to mine their treasures will provide a perfect balance of justification and sanctification. It provides much more, though. It provides a sense of that wonderful “pattern of sound teaching” (2 Timothy 1:13), where our faith in Christ predominates and where sanctification issues are exposed and corrected as only the Holy Spirit can do it.

In this chapter and the next, we will look at a few examples of this pattern. We start with Ephesians 5:22-33. I won’t write out al] these verses. You may wish to read them before you go on. This is the section where Paul tells husbands and wives to submit to each other and then spells out how each should do this.

It is not Paul’s intent merely to outline a program of living. Nor does he merely state God’s will. Rather, he chooses ways of discussing the issue that are drawn from the gospel of God’s grace. In other words, he recognizes the issue (and the problem) and then chooses one aspect of the gospel message appropriate for it. Here he deals with the roles of men and women. Since the roles of men and women deal with (1) a relationship and (2) a relationship in which there is a certain hierarchy (although that is too cold a term), Paul sets the marriage of a man and a woman against the backdrop of the relationship of Christ and the church.

Paul begins with a few words to wives. He tells wives to submit to their husbands. Many wives don’t want to do this. Yet when wives read these words, they see that their submission goes deeper than a forced submission to the sometimes arbitrary human will of their husbands. Paul pictures the

relationship of the church to Christ. Christ is the head; the church is his body. When a wife thinks of this relationship, she sees a beautiful picture in which headship and submission can exist without any feelings of animosity or arbitrary superiority. No member of Christ’s church sees Christ as an arbitrary, self-centered head. Every member of the church willingly submits to Christ because he or she knows that Christ gave up his life for the church and wants nothing but the church’s good. Christ is the perfect head. Husbands are never perfect heads. Sin precludes that. But Paul tells the wife that she should submit to her head with the same devotion that the church submits to Christ. This evokes willingness in the wife to submit to her less-than-perfect husband, for she certainly is willing to submit to Christ.

Paul turns to the husband and has much more to say to him. The picture of Christ loving the church creates a true understanding of headship. The husband often looks to the wife to generate feelings of love in the marriage. But imagine this: If Christ waited for the church to initiate the love in his relationship with her, he would be waiting forever. Christ must lead. He did lead. And the church follows. If there is a lack of love in the marriage, the husband should first look at himself. That said, Paul reminds us of the great sacrifice Christ made for his church. Husbands are to love their wives in the same way, sacrificing themselves for their wives.

Christ did more. He sacrificed himself for his church to make her members into something they were not. He made his church holy. He did this through Baptism (as we saw so clearly in Romans 6), which joins us with Christ in his death and life. He made the church beautiful, and then he presented her to himself in all her perfection and joined her to him. The church (and all her members) has become part of Christ, his body, which he nourishes and cares for. This symbolizes the union between a husband and wife. The wife is the husband’s body, and he is her head; she draws care and nurture from him.

In this section on husbands and wives, the Lord actually dedicates more words to describing Christ and his church. Christian husbands and wives know what Christ means to

them. They know how Christ loves the church, and they understand what it means that the church submits to Christ. They also know how Christ acts toward the church as the church’s head, doing nothing but good for her. It is this union—Christ and his church—that drives Paul’s discussion. It infuses everything he says about the relationship of husbands and wives under God with the gospel. This is true gospel motivation. The gospel sets the tone, gives the pattern, and supplies the reason for how husbands and wives are to deal with each other.

What is practical?

At this point let’s pause and think about what Paul is doing in Ephesians 5. Paul here is talking about a very practical subject. How Paul approaches marriage is interesting in view of what our modern culture is crying out for because of its problems with marriage and family issues. The cry today is for practical, easily applied advice. Congregations, wanting to grow, find almost overwhelming the desire to use this need to bring people into association with their church. So they offer practical seminars and programs for the community. Since the home and family in Western culture is disintegrating and many are crying out for answers, churches find ready audiences of husbands and wives seeking answers to their desperate questions about their married lives together.

The comments that follow are meant to lead us to think about what it means for church leaders to be “practical” in view of Paul’s discussion in Ephesians 5 and other places. I believe there is a tension between what is practical in the world’s definition and what is practical in Christian terms. When well-meaning seminar leaders look to Scripture for practical advice, they stumble onto sections of Scripture that contain good advice, to be sure. But they also find the Bible writer’s entire discussion based on the gospel and how life should reflect the Christian hope, not just the desire for a better earthly life.

One person made a helpful distinction between two kinds of knowledge. He distinguished between “good things” and “God’s things.”

Good things are just that, good pieces of knowledge and understanding that one person may gain and pass on to another. Through the work of observing and counseling others and through the writings of particularly wise people, we gather a good deal of knowledge and understanding about how things work. We know what things contribute to our temporal happiness and well-being and what things harm them. The church is often viewed as a dispenser of good things: wisdom from God found in the Bible, put into practice in the Christian community and proven to produce happiness and well-being.

God’s things, though, are different. God’s things relate to our salvation. God’s things stem from a wisdom that is not based on experience. God’s wisdom centers on the death and life of Jesus. It centers on Baptism, on Christ’s righteousness, and on the fact that we are free from the law. God’s things center on the new life created in us. God’s things focus on living in service to God.

The desire to hear good things and put them into practice stems from human desires. The desire to hear God’s things begins with wanting to hear about Christ, and the desire to do the right thing stems from a desire to live in line with what we have become, God’s redeemed children.

The work of the church will invariably entail dispensing good things and God’s things. Counseling will always include practical advice on how to deal with the issues that arise in marriage and the family. Christian love leads us to help in whatever way we can, whether that is relief aid for starvation victims or relief aid to families starving for peace.

But is this the work Christ has given his church? Can good things and God’s things actually coexist in a person’s ministry? I would answer yes and no. Yes, because the Christian will do everything he or she can to help others with whatever needs they have, including marriage and family needs. But I would also answer no, because the church is given the work of proclaiming God’s message of salvation and leading people to live for him. The church must be careful that in its preaching and teaching and even counseling it strives to keep that mission foremost in its mind.

So what does it mean to be practical? Sad to say, in the minds of many, practical religion means religion stripped of theology. It means dispensing how-to advice. It means counseling to one’s individual, personal, and unique needs, rather than preaching global truths that deal with God’s salvation for the whole world and that deal especially with Christians— sin, forgiveness, the new creation, and living lives of love.

We might ask, what does God consider to be truly practical? From Scripture we learn that his definition of practicality is not quite the same as the world’s. The heart of practicality can be summarized in Paul’s statement, “Whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God” (1 Corinthians 10:31). What is to God’s glory? God is glorified when he brings people from darkness to light, extends his rule of grace, and leads people into heaven. God is glorified when people honor, love, and obey him and worship him by following his commands. God is glorified when people seek to grow in Christ, seeking first his kingdom and resting content to have God give them what he wants to give them according to his time schedule.

Everything we have seen about gospel motivation has presupposed that the gospel was the most important thing to Paul’s readers. If it was not, then everything Paul said fell on deaf ears and God has preserved Paul’s words only to be culled for some tidbit of practical truth that can be extracted from it. For example, is Paul talking about husbands and wives in Ephesians 5? Is he giving married people practical advice for living? Again, yes and no. Yes in the sense that Paul is discussing something concrete that I should do in my life. But what he writes was not written to help my earthly well-being but to teach me how to live in light of my faith in Christ, his living relationship with the church. How can anyone offer a practical marriage class to non-Christians in the community and use Ephesians 5? It is beyond me.

Let’s ask the question another way. Is God concerned about our practical happiness and well-being? If you were the Lord, how would you show your concern to someone you love, knowing that the brief and momentary time we spend on this earth is a grain of sand compared with the eternity that stretches

out before us? If you truly loved that person, you would be concerned about whether he or she navigates this life successfully, interpreting the word successfully as avoiding anything that would take away that person’s faith. You certainly would want that person to be happy in his or her marriage. But there may come a time when God may not want a person to have a happy marriage because marital problems are part of his chastening work. Or the Lord may know that the suffering a person must go through is necessary for his or her faith— perhaps a time of humbling or a time when he is dealing with the other spouse’s sinful nature. That is truly practical. That’s the Bible’s definition of practical.

Finally, how would you define practical in light of everything we have seen so far in our look at gospel motivation? How practical is our baptism in terms of Romans 6? How practical is our knowledge that we have received Christ’s righteousness and are slaves of righteousness? How practical is the teaching that we are free from the law? How practical is Paul’s discussion of the new man and the old man? How practical is Paul’s statement that if we put to death the misdeeds of the body, we will live? How practical is the Bible’s teaching of hell and of heaven?

Is there anything on earth that is more practical than these truths? People who have hope only for this life may or may not be influenced by the problems of their lives to seek advice and apply it. Sick people keep on eating as they did before they became sick, even though they know their eating habits will eventually kill them. Alcoholics continue to drink in spite of the harm it causes their bodies, jobs, and home life. Men continue to view pornography in spite of the harm such self-indulgence brings into their lives. You can describe the sin and expose its consequences and still the sinful nature will commit those sins, even to the point of sadistic self-destruction.

Only what transcends this life is truly practical. Only the truth of God’s eternal judgment on the sinner and his gracious redemption in Christ truly mean something. If this life and our happiness here is all there is to live for, then the sinful nature will always win the battle as to how this life should be

lived. If morality is merely a personal thing, warranting reward or punishment in this life, the sinful nature will always win the argument as to whether a little pain is worth the pleasure of lust and sinful ambition. If self-interest is pitted against love and kindness to others, the sinful nature will always choose self-interest, yes, even if it comes in the form of “service to others.”

Only life in Christ transcends the risk of temporal punishment for immorality and our inherent selfishness. It lifts us above the “practical” desires of the world and leads us to think of life in view of God and his glory. Such a view of life can only come through realizing our sin (another theological concept, but so practical in the ultimate sense) and repenting of it. It comes only by submitting to Christ’s righteousness and finding our hope there. It comes only through the power of the Holy Spirit working through the gospel of our death and life in Christ. The sinful nature can only be stopped when in Christ the law’s demands are removed from contact with the lusts of the sinful nature. Only then can I serve in a new and willing spirit. The church can only carry out its mission and be truly practical if it relegates itself to preaching the law and the gospel. Every other message is a Band-Aid for a cancer patient.

Examples, continued

We should get back to the theme of this chapter, namely, instances of how the writers of the New Testament weave the gospel into all their admonitions and encouragements.

One of the most striking sections of the New Testament for our purposes is a series of chapters in 1 Corinthians. Those familiar with 1 Corinthians know it to be a letter written to a congregation that had a lot of problems. The Lord had richly blessed the Corinthians, but they did not make the jump from pagan thinking to godly thinking overnight, at least not in every corner of their lives.

In his first letter to the Corinthians, Paul addresses a number of problems, spanning chapters 5 through 14. He moves from one issue to the next. What is striking is the pattern he follows. He presents the issue, and then he follows with some aspect of the gospel or with some way the gospel has had an

impact on the Corinthians’ lives. We will take the issues in order. You may want to read chapters 5 through 11. (Add 12 through 14 if you wish. We'll touch briefly on those chapters.)

In chapter 5 Paul addresses a sin that a member of the church was committing. A man was committing incest with his mother (probably his stepmother). The sin was out in the open, and the members of the congregation knew about it. They were also being rather open-minded about the sin, and they refused to take a stand against it. Paul rebuked them. He said, “Hand this man over to Satan, so that the sinful nature may be destroyed and his spirit saved on the day of the Lord” (verse 5). At this point Paul injected the gospel into his discussion. He did it in a way that fit the problem he was working with. Not all the Corinthians were engaged in the actual sin, of course. But they were implicating themselves in it by not doing anything about it. So how should Paul bring the gospel into the mix? Remember, he has already rebuked the Corinthians with the law. Now he wants to fill their hearts with gospel motivation. Paul is not just concerned about the immoral nature of the sin, the effects the sin might have on the people committing it, or even about the spiritual life of the Corinthian church. Paul knows that if they continue to condone the sin, the gospel will no longer mean anything to them and eventually they will lose it.

Paul’s approach to the problem contains three elements (1 Corinthians 5:6-8). First, he uses a few short phrases designed to remind his readers of a time in the Old Testament when the gospel shone clearly in the lives of God’s people. This was the Passover. Second, he states that the Passover was fulfilled when Jesus died for their sins. Third, he shows how the Passover Feast (the festival Israel was to follow in the days after the Passover itself) was fulfilled in their lives when they came to know Jesus.

Paul encouraged them in a masterful way. The people of Israel were to get rid of yeast in their homes prior to the Passover. When the day came, they were to make unleavened bread and eat it with the lamb that had been killed earlier that day. A little yeast left in the home could potentially work its way into the dough and spoil the unleavened bread. Yeast

was clearly a picture of sin. When the people of Israel rid their homes of yeast, in their minds they were purifying their lives so they could celebrate the Passover. The unleavened bread symbolized repentance and a home that had rid itself of sin.

Paul wove all these ideas together. Jesus, our Passover Lamb, has been sacrificed. We have the forgiveness of sin. We are to rid our lives of the leaven of sin and be pure, just “as [we] really are.” In other words, in our lives we are to be what we have become in Christ. Then as we eat the Passover festival every day anew, we are not to eat it with the sinful bread we used to eat but with unleavened bread, that is, with sincere hearts, doing what is in line with the truth.

Using images from the first Passover, Paul sets Christ, the Passover Lamb, in the middle of the problem. Paul is confident that the Corinthians’ love for Christ will shape their hearts to follow God’s will.

In 1 Corinthians 6, Paul addresses lawsuits among believers (verses 1-11) and sexual immorality (verses 12-20). The Corinthians were dragging fellow Christians before secular courts and leveling charges against them. Paul rebuked them in a number of ways. He finished his rebuke by getting to the heart of the problem—greed and wickedness. He reminded the Corinthians:

Do you not know that the wicked will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor male prostitutes nor homosexual offenders nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. (1 Corinthians 6:9,10)

But then, after this scathing rebuke, Paul reminds them that they have been delivered from these sins and their inevitable end.

That is what some of you were. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God. (1 Corinthians 6:11)

The gospel is closely packed into these verses. In one short verse, we have the message of Baptism, the forgiveness of

sins, God’s declaration of justification (“not guilty”), and reminders that all this came through Jesus Christ, and that we have received the Holy Spirit, who has worked all of these blessings in us.

In 1 Corinthians 6:12-20, Paul addresses sexual immorality. The sin of prostitution was common in Corinth as in most of the ancient world. The sexual act had deep religious significance. Many Corinthians believed that when the gods saw humans having sexual intercourse, they were moved to make the earth fertile and bless humans with the gift of children. Ingrained patterns of behavior were hard to break, especially in regard to actions that had formerly been considered to be a religious duty. :

Paul knew he had to rebuke the Corinthians. He did, but he also wove the gospel into his rebuke, again, in a way especially tailored to the problem. Since the sin had to do with their bodies, Paul addressed the issue from that standpoint. Paul pointed out the relation of our bodies to our Lord. The body is “for the Lord, and the Lord for the body” (verse 13). Christ and his Father have come to live in us. For this reason we are to use our bodies in service to the Lord: “Offer yourselves to God, as those who have been brought from death to life; and offer the parts of your body to him as instruments of righteousness” (Romans 6:13). In 1 Corinthians 6:17, Paul reminds the Corinthians that in Christ they have the wonderful blessing of being united in spirit with God. Why give up that unity by being joined with a prostitute? In verses 19 and 20, Paul reminds us that God’s Spirit is living in us. God gave us his Spirit because Christ gave up his own life to make us people who belong to God. Our union with Christ precludes union with sin.

In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul answers questions the Corinthians had asked about marriage. Paul does not weave the gospel into his answers as he did in the previous two chapters. But it is clear that the gospel and the Corinthians’ relationship with Christ is still at the heart of his thoughts. Husbands and wives should not deprive each other, lest Satan tempt them (7:5). Christians should not divorce their non-Christian spouses, because if they do, their spouses and children will

not have the presence of the gospel in their lives. A Christian 1s so concerned about the faith of his or her children and spouse that he or she is willing to remain in a difficult marriage for the sake of their spiritual welfare (7:14).

Christians should be content to remain in whatever situation they were in when they came to faith. This could apply to marriage or to circumcision. Slaves should be content to remain slaves if it is God’s will, because in Christ they are free. Freemen should not look down on their slaves, because through faith they themselves have become slaves to God and to the righteousness they have by faith (7:20-24). Even the decision whether or not to get married is to be guided by how this impacts one’s work for the Lord.

In 1 Corinthians 8, Paul addresses eating food sacrificed to idols. Most modern readers, especially Western readers, probably won't relate to this problem. Here’s what was happening. A citizen of an ancient heathen city worshiped his or her god by bringing a sacrifice to the temple. The sacrifice might be a lamb or goat or cow. Often we imagine the priest leading this sacrifice to the altar, killing it, cutting it apart, and burning the whole thing. That would only be partially correct. Some of the sacrifices were probably burned up completely. But in many cases, only parts of the sacrifice were burned, perhaps because the priest thought the parts were what the god preferred. Much of the sacrifice remained after the ceremony was over. A good portion of the meat was sent to butcher shops adjacent to the temple. The money the people paid to buy the meat would go to support the temple. It was an ongoing bake sale of sorts.

If you had just come to faith in Christ, what would you have done if this were the only place, or perhaps the most convenient place, to buy meat? That’s the situation behind the issue Paul had to address. Some were buying and eating this meat in good conscience, realizing that a false god was a figment of people’s imagination, prompted by Satan. Others, however, felt that an idol, a figment of sinful imagination or not, was still associated with sins against the First Commandment. They felt guilt by association and refused to eat this meat. If they went to the home of someone who served such

meat, they might think, “Well, it is probably okay to eat this. My conscience feels uneasy about joining in, but Ill eat it anyway.” When a Christian sins against his conscience like this, he sins, even if what he is doing is not sinful.

You can probably guess how Paul would advise in this matter. Read the following verses to find out. For our purposes, however, we are interested if and how Paul weaves the gospel into his instructions. He does not disappoint us. Once again, he weaves the gospel into the section in a way appropriate to the theme. Read how Paul begins the section, and also read verses 4, 7, and 10. The main words are know and knowledge. The problem originated between some people who knew something (it’s okay to eat this food) and some who did not know this, or at least did not accept it in their hearts and consciences. So Paul focuses on knowledge:

Now about food sacrificed to idols: We know that we all possess knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. The man who thinks he knows something does not yet know as he ought to know. But the man who loves God is known by God. (1 Corinthians 8:1-3)

Paul begins with the concept of knowledge. Then he immediately shifts the thought to love, because love, not knowledge, is important. Knowledge can tear Christians apart. Love will always bind them together. So far, so good. But note the beautiful touch of Paul’s final words in verse 3. There is a very important kind of knowledge, Paul says. It’s the knowledge God has of us, that he knows us in Christ and views us as his children in Christ. Tracking Paul’s thought backwards, he points out that those who know that they are known by God will reflect God’s love. Love will direct them to handle the situation correctly. In a concise way, the whole issue is introduced and resolved. Understand knowledge in the right way, Paul says, and then love your fellow Christian (who may not be on your level of knowledge) because you know that God loves you in Christ (in spite of the fact that you are not at all on Christ’s level). ‘

As we work through this section, we see other bits of gospel woven into Paul’s words. He reminds us that if

we selfishly force our knowledge on one of God’s children, we will destroy someone “for whom Christ died” (verse 11). He also focuses on the true knowledge that binds us together with fellow Christians. There is one Father who made us and directs our lives; there is “but one Lord, Jesus Christ” who created all things and died for us so that we might live in him. This way of speaking helps us see our fellow Christians for who they are, namely, people who are one with us in the Lord.

First Corinthians 9 is a bit different than the preceding chapters. Some in the Corinthian congregation were judging Paul and criticizing the way he carried out his ministry. In his defense, Paul speaks about the purity and sincerity of his heart when he preached the gospel to them. He explains how the gospel is continually motivating him to give his entire life in its service. We won’t look at this section in detail, but one verse summarizes everything he says: “I do all this for the sake of the gospel, that I may share in its blessings” (1 Corinthians 9:23).

Citizens of a Greek city-state like Corinth were brought up worshiping idols. It was nothing strange to them. The temptations they faced would be equivalent to what a Japanese Christian today would face at conversion. If one spouse in the marriage came to faith, he or she would still go to bed at night looking at his or her spouse’s little Shinto shrine in the bedroom or perhaps a shrine to Buddha in the hallway. Secular and sacred would be mixed, and not going to an idol celebration for conscience reasons would be like taking a stand against a Fourth of July celebration in the United States.

The temptation to bow down before idols was strong in Corinth. The comparison of an idol festival with a Fourth of July celebration breaks down, however, when we realize what idol festivals entailed. When the gods were worshiped with temple prostitution, you can imagine the further compromises Christians were forced to make if they did give in to pressure to attend a feast.

This is the situation Paul addresses in 1 Corinthians 10. There are a lot of law warnings in verses 1 to 13, where Paul draws from Israel’s history. But there is also gospel woven in.

For example, Paul urges the Corinthians to remember God’s blessings: Christ himself, Baptism, and the Lord’s Supper:

I do not want you to be ignorant of the fact, brothers, that our forefathers were all under the cloud and that they all passed through the sea. They were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. They all ate the same spiritual food and drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them, and that rock was Christ. Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them; their bodies were scattered over the desert. (1 Corinthians 10:1-5)

Look at how creative Paul is. He joins New Testament Christians with Old Testament believers so he can use the sins of people in the Old Testament to warn the Corinthians against idolatry. The Israelites were baptized into Moses, a man in service to the Lord on behalf of Israel. We also have been baptized into Jesus’ death and resurrection. The Israelites ate spiritual food—manna from heaven—and they drank spiritual drink—water flowing from dry rocks. We also eat spiritual food and drink spiritual drink—the Lord’s Supper. They had Christ, the Angel of the Lord, accompanying them. We also are joined to Christ by faith, and he accompanies us through life. In a masterful way, Paul links us with the Old Testament people of God and reminds us of the blessings we have received. Now he can warn the Corinthians and us against idolatry. The Israelites rejected God’s blessings, and God punished them. We should never follow their pattern.

Beginning in 1 Corinthians 10:14, where he addresses idol feasts directly, Paul follows his pattern by placing the gospel of the Lord’s Supper right in the middle of the problem. Paul begins by reminding the Corinthians of what they ate and drank in the Lord’s Supper:

I speak to sensible people; judge for yourselves what I say. Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that. we break a participation in in the body of Christ? (1 Corinthians 10:15,16)

The problem Paul is addressing has to do with eating and drinking at an idol feast. So his theme is going to be just that, eating and drinking at a feast. Christians also have a feast, the Lord’s feast, to which the Lord has invited us. When we drink wine at his feast, we drink the blood of Christ. When we eat bread at his feast, we eat the body of Christ. We also join ourselves with fellow Christians, for when we eat and drink we participate in the one Christ.

Paul applies all this in these words: “You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons too; you cannot have a part in both the Lord’s table and the table of demons” (1 Corinthians 10:21). Paul’s warning is not a bare warning based on the Ten Commandments. It is a warning based on the incongruity of doing two opposite things at the same time. Such a thing will “arouse the Lord’s jealousy.”

Returning to the issue of eating food from the butcher shops located around the idol temples, Paul writes, “Whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God” (1 Corinthians 10:31).

We have already discussed chapter 11 to some extent in our section on the gospel of the sacraments. The Corinthians were having trouble in their worship services; specifically, the rich were looking down on the poor and segregating themselves from them. So what does Paul do? He reminds them again of the Lord’s Supper that both the rich and poor celebrate together. This will have the effect of clearing up the problems from within, that is, hearts motivated by the gospel of forgiveness contained in the Lord’s Supper will enable the Corinthians to deal with fellow Christians in love.

First Corinthians 12 and 14 deal with spiritual gifts. We won't be looking at these chapters in detail. Please note one thing, however. Right in the middle of his discussion on the proper use of spiritual gifts—which can stir up pride and strife if not used in a God-pleasing way—Paul places what has become one of the most famous chapters in Scripture, the chapter on love. This chapter deals with brotherly love in Christ, the kind of love that will guide and shape the way Christians use their spiritual gifts. God’s gifts, Paul says,

mean nothing unless they are used in a spirit of love, which can only come from the knowledge of God’s love for us.

We will touch on a few more special examples in the next chapter.
