# Preparation for Confession and Absolution

PREPARATION FOR CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION

BRIEF INSTRUCTION ON CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION My dear Christian, when you go to confession, do not be content with repeating a memorized confessional prayer or with having your pastor repeat it to you. Rather, bring along a penitent heart, from which your confession will flow. To offer confession when the heart is impenitent is mocking God. Without a penitent heart there is no forgiveness of sin. The first requirement for a penitent heart is that you recognize your sins, feel sorry and repentant of them. By nature no man knows his sins, nor can he by his own doing cause repentance to spring from his heart. On the contrary, repentance comes from God. By nature we are far too blind, too indifferent, too careless, too self-righteous, too much absorbed in self-love and self-conceit, to plead guilty of all sins in the sight of God. Above all things, therefore, bow your knees before God and call upon Him to open your eyes that you may thoroughly recognize the multitude and magnitude of your sins. Pray in the words of the sainted David: “Search me, O God, and know my heart! Try me, and know my thoughts! And see if there be any grievous way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting!” (Psalm 139:23–24). Make a careful examination of your whole life according to the Ten Commandments. You will then soon find that you are a sinner. For even as a man does not see a spot on his face without a mirror, so he does not recognize his sins unless he sees himself in the mirror of the holy Ten Commandments. For every thought, every word, every deed against God’s commandments is a sin, whether it consists in doing what God has forbidden or in failing to do what He has commanded. But you must look not only at the large, external sins, but also those internal, secret digressions from God’s commandments, the evil thoughts and desires of your heart. When examining yourself, being instant in prayer, you will discover that you did not fear, love, and trust in God as He demands; that you have not called upon God in prayer, praise, and thanksgiving so heartily and confidently as you should have done; that you have not properly heard and learned His Word and kept it sacred. You will find that you have not duly honored and obeyed your parents and superiors, but that you have been disobedient and discourteous toward them; that you

have sinned against your neighbor by being angry, revengeful, and unforgiving; by entertaining unholy thoughts and desires; by showing envy, covetousness, and a sinful mind or by speaking slanderous words. To sum up, you will come to know that you did not love your neighbor uprightly and heartily as yourself; rather, that self-love, quest for personal gain and honor, was the moving force of all your actions. Because of these and other sins you indeed have deserved God’s wrath, temporal and eternal punishment, if God would deal with you strictly according to justice. From these sins that you notice in yourself you can infer how unclean and polluted your heart must be from which these sins flow; for the stream is no purer than its fountain, and by its fruits the tree is known. In this way you will come to a true knowledge of original sin. Consider also the sins you do not know, but still have committed. They are far more numerous than those you do know. The omniscient God places all your sins in the light of His countenance. Knowing this, you certainly will be terrified in your conscience and experience sorrow and contrition for having offended your loving God so grievously and for having repaid His mercies with such dishonorable ingratitude. The second part of repentance is faith, faith in Jesus Christ. It is He who has rendered full satisfaction for all your sins, procuring forgiveness of them all. Faith is, so to speak, the hand that appropriates forgiveness of sin and accepts it as an unmerited gift of divine grace. Without this faith all knowledge of sin and penitence over it is nothing but the repentance of a Cain and of a Judas and must end in despair. But by faith in Jesus Christ, the Savior of all sinners, the heart is comforted and satisfied. This faith, however, you cannot bring forth yourself; it is the work and gift of God the Holy Spirit. But if you feel that your faith is weak—you desire to believe, but you think you cannot—then pray to God to strengthen this faith of yours, which is battling against doubt. He is willing to do so and surely will give you a stronger faith, so that you will overcome all the doubts which are troubling your soul. If you come to confession with such a penitent and believing heart, you will rejoice in the absolution spoken by your pastor. For your sins are really and truly forgiven by God in heaven. Such forgiveness of sins Christ has procured for all sinners by the shedding of His blood and by His death, and by His resurrection He sealed it to them. This He commanded to preach

throughout the world by means of the Gospel. Therefore when your pastor absolves you, he does nothing else than proclaim to you the Gospel of the forgiveness of sins. This, however, is not an empty announcement, but one actually offering and conveying the forgiveness of sins to the penitent sinner. Whenever, therefore, you hear your pastor pronounce absolution, do not doubt, but firmly believe, that your sins are forgiven before God in heaven. Believe it as firmly as though Christ were calling to you directly from heaven: “My son [My daughter], your sins are forgiven” (Matthew 9:2). For He says: “The one who hears you hears Me” (Luke 10:16); and: “If you forgive the sins of anyone, they are forgiven” (John 21:23). Then the fruits of repentance are to follow. These consist in no longer knowingly and intentionally committing such sins as were forgiven you, but rather hating them, abstaining from them, and battling against them with the assistance of the Holy Spirit.

PREPARATION FOR CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION ACCORDING TO THE TEN COMMANDMENTS

The First Commandment You shall have no other gods. What does this mean? We should fear, love, and trust in God above all things. What or whom do I fear most? In what or whom do I trust most for financial security, physical safety, or emotional support? Do I fear God’s wrath and therefore avoid every sin? Is my love of God evident in my daily life? Do I expect only good from God in every situation, or do I worry, doubt, complain, or feel unfairly treated when things go wrong?

The Second Commandment

You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not curse, swear, use satanic arts, lie, or deceive by His name, but call upon it in every trouble, pray, praise, and give thanks. Does the Gospel adorn my daily speech and conduct, or do I curse, speak carelessly, or misuse God’s name? Have I kept all the vows I have made in the Lord’s name? Am I diligent and sincere in my prayers, or have I been lazy, bored or distracted? Do I trust that the Lord God will answer them according to His good and gracious will?

The Third Commandment

Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not despise preaching and His Word, but hold it sacred and gladly hear and learn it. Do I despise the Word by neglect or by paying little or no attention when it is read or preached? Am I faithful in the Divine Service, or do I attend sporadically, preferring to be elsewhere when the Church is at worship? Do I pray for my pastor and support his efforts to guard Christ’s flock from error?

The Fourth Commandment Honor your father and your mother. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not despise or anger our parents and other authorities, but honor them, serve and obey them, love and cherish them. Do I submit to those whom God has put in authority over me? Have I been ashamed of, angry, stubborn, or disrespectful toward my parents, teachers, employer, pastor, government or other authorities? Do I obey all the laws of the city, state and country, and pay my rightful share of all taxes?

The Fifth Commandment

You shall not murder. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not hurt or harm our neighbor in his body, but help and support him in every physical need.

Have I unjustly taken the life of anyone, born or unborn? Do I hate anyone, or am I angry with anyone? Do I hold grudges or harbor resentment? Am I abusive (in word or deed) toward my spouse, children, or anyone else? Have I ignored the plight of the helpless or been callous toward genuine need?

The Sixth Commandment

You shall not commit adultery. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we lead a sexually pure and decent life in what we say and do, and husband and wife love and honor each other. Have I held in highest regard God’s gift of sexuality or have I debased it in any way by my thoughts, words or conduct? Am I guilty of lust, indecency, or the use of pornography? Have I reserved my sexual activity for the pleasure and consolation of my spouse, and when God wills, the procreation of children?

The Seventh Commandment

You shall not steal. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not take our neighbor’s money or possessions, or get them in any dishonest way, but help him to improve and protect his possessions and income. Have I gotten anything in a dishonest way? Have I made illegal copies of any printed material, audio or video tapes, or computer programs? Do I faithfully attend to the responsibilities of my vocation?

Do I take care of what I have, pay what I owe, return what I borrow, and respect other people’s property? Do I give generously, or am I selfish, stingy and greedy with my time and money?

The Eighth Commandment

You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not tell lies about our neighbor, betray him, slander him, or hurt his reputation, but defend him, speak well of him, and explain everything in the kindest way. Do I speak the truth or have I lied in any way? Do I gossip or take pleasure in talking about the faults and mistakes of others? Do I uphold and defend the name and reputation of others? Have I judged others without being duly authorized to do so? Have I gladly and willingly found ways to explain in the best possible way the words or actions of those who hurt me? Am I the first to admit my own mistakes, or do I cover up my sins and make myself look better than I am?

The Ninth Commandment

You shall not covet your neighbor’s house. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not scheme to get our neighbor’s inherit-ance or house, or get it in a way which only appears right, but help and be of service to him in keeping it. Do I have strong wants, desires, or cravings that consume my thoughts? Do I resent or envy those who have more than I?

Do I neglect my marriage, family, church, and other relationships in a desperate attempt to satisfy the wants and desires of my flesh? Have my wants kept me from being happy with and thankful for what God has given me?

The Tenth Commandment

You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife, or his manservant or maidservant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor. What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not entice or force away our neighbor’s wife, workers, or animals, or turn them against him, but urge them to stay and do their duty. Am I discontented with the spouse the Lord God has given me? Am I discontented with the job I have or the employees I supervise? Have I neglected to urge someone to remain faithful to his or her spouse? Have I wanted my neighbor’s husband or wife, boyfriend or girlfriend, workers or property to be mine?

A PRAYER OF ONE PREPARING FOR CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner! Your Word is a lamp unto my feet and a light upon my path. It has laid bare my sin, for which I deserve nothing but punishment; yet, it has also declared to me Your grace and mercy and forgiveness. As You have taught my heart to believe and trust in You, so shall I also confess with my mouth. Grant me the honesty to examine my life according to Your holy Ten Commandments, especially as they address my vocations in life. Discipline me as Your beloved child. Enable me to recognize my sin, to know and feel it in my heart, and rightly to bemoan and lament my iniquity and offenses. Give me both humility and courage to confess my sins and to receive from my pastor Your Holy Absolution, according to Your good and gracious will. Invigorate my faith, through this same word of forgiveness, to have no doubt, but firmly to believe, that by it all my sins are forgiven before God in heaven. You have called and sent my pastor, in Your name and stead, to hear my confession with Your ears of mercy and to forgive me with Your own voice. Since You have chosen to deal with me in this way, allow me not to neglect Your gift but to lay hold of it with eager confidence. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and restore to me the joy of Your salvation; for Your name’s sake. Amen.

Individual Confession and

Absolution You may prepare yourself by meditating on the Ten Commandments (pp. 1446–1447). You may also pray the penitential psalms (6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, or 143). If you are not burdened with particular sins, do not trouble yourself or search for or invent other sins, thereby turning confession into a torture. Instead, mention one or two sins that you know and let that be enough. When you are ready, kneel and say: Pastor, please hear my confession and pronounce forgiveness in order to fulfill God’s will. Proceed. I, a poor sinner, plead guilty before God of all sins. I have lived as if God did not matter and as if I mattered most. My Lord’s name I have not honored as I should; my worship and prayers have faltered. I have not let His love have its way with me, and so my love for others has failed. There are those whom I have hurt, and those whom I have failed to help. My thoughts and desires have been soiled with sin. If you wish to confess specific sins that trouble you, continue as follows: What troubles me particularly is that … Confess whatever you have done against the commandments of God, according to your own place in life. The pastor may gently question or instruct you—not to pry or judge—but to assist in self-examination. Then conclude by saying:

I am sorry for all of this and ask for grace. I want to do better. God be merciful to you and strengthen your faith. Amen. Do you believe that my forgiveness is God’s forgiveness? Yes. Let it be done for you as you believe.

The pastor places his hands on the head of the penitent and says: In the stead and by the command of my Lord Jesus Christ I forgive you all your sins in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Amen. The pastor may speak additional Scripture passages to comfort and strengthen the faith of those who have great burdens of conscience or are sorrowful and distressed. The pastor concludes: Go in peace. Amen. You may remain to say a prayer of thanksgiving. Psalms 30, 31, 32, 34, 103, or 118 are also appropriate.
