# Romans 6:1-13

The New Testament writers saw the gospel as the heart and center of their existence. Everything they said and did was shaped around the gospel, for the gospel was their greatest treasure, rising above anything this world offered. Through their letters, the apostles worked to encourage Christians to hold fast to the gospel and live to serve the Lord who loves them and forgave their sins.

In their zeal, the apostles looked at the gospel from many standpoints and brought each one to bear on the lives of God’s people. That is the purpose of this book, to explore the many ways they did this.

A good place to start is with the gospel of death and life. It is where Paul led the Romans in chapter 6 of his letter to the Romans. This chapter and the first half of chapter 7 occupy a strategic place in the book of Romans. In the first five chapters, Paul reviewed the law and the gospel. He reminded the Romans about God’s wrath that was being poured out on the world because the world chose to worship idols rather than God. But then he reminded them about the mercy and grace God poured out on the world through his Son, Jesus, who died for all sins and calls people to repent and believe and be saved from God’s wrath.

After Paul reviewed the gospel message in Romans, he did something unique in his writings. He did not immediately talk about special ways his readers should serve the Lord. He did not deal with personal sin, congregational problems, or special instructions the Romans needed. Rather, he explained (but hardly in an academic way) their new relationships with Christ, sin, and the law. He would talk about specific ways the Romans should serve the Lord beginning in chapter 12. But here in chapters 6 and 7, Paul talks about the foundation of gospel motivation. In fact, chapter 6 begins a complete discussion, going on for three chapters, of how Christians should view their new lives in Christ.

In the first half of chapter 6 and the first six verses of chapter 7, Paul talks about the gospel in terms of death and life. Christians are to view themselves as both dead and alive. He asks us:

What shall we say, then? Shall we go on sinning so that grace may increase? By no means! We died to sin; how can we live in it any longer? (6:1,2)

Paul’s critics seem to have accused him of encouraging people to sin more so that God could forgive them more. (Actually, Paul is encouraging people to look at the law and uncover just how much they have sinned, confess their sins to God, and receive forgiveness.) Paul defends himself against that idea. He is saying, “We are the kind of people who have died to sin. How can we go on living a life of sin?”

Now Paul brings in the gospel of death and life, if we can be permitted to call it that. He writes:

Don’t you know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? We were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too may live a new life. (6:3,4)

Baptism does great things. Through our baptism, we were joined with Jesus in his death and we were buried with him into his death. We died so that we might rise to life again. The NIV translation “we too may live a new life” sounds like this in the Greek: “in order that we too might walk in the newness of life.” The term Paul uses here for “walk” he usually uses in reference to what we do in life, that is, the things we do to serve God. “Newness of life” is a new kind of existence, a new status before God, which is the context for our new “walk.”

Paul continues to explain the change that has come about in us.

If we have been united with him like this in his death, we will certainly also be united with him in his resurrection. (6:5)

We must be careful here. At first glace it sounds as if Paul is talking about the resurrection of our bodies on the Last Day. But from the context (note verse 11) we see that he is talking about a resurrection we are enjoying right now, the “newness of life” he just referred to. Paul uses the word will as we do when we say, “If it’s light out, the sun will be shining.” The idea is more logical than future—in other words, “If this happens, then that will necessarily happen also.” If we were joined with Jesus in death at our baptism, then it is logical that we will also be joined with him in his resurrection—and we are. Paul literally says that we are joined with Jesus in the “likeness of his death” and in the “likeness of his resurrection,” telling us that he is not necessarily talking about our physical death and resurrection.

The next verses spell out what happened to Jesus and also what happened to us since we were joined to him.

We know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body of sin might be done away with, that we should no longer be slaves to sin—because anyone who has died has been freed from sin. Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him. (6:6-8)

Simply put, if we have died, we have been freed from sin. A person who has died is no longer under the law, nor is that person subject to the compulsions of the sinful nature. Paul continues:

We know that since Christ was raised from the dead, he cannot die again; death no longer has mastery over him. The death he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to God. In the same way, count yourselves dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus. (6:9-11)

The work of Christ is complete. He conquered sin completely, and his victory makes it so that he will never have to die again. He died once, and when he died, he died for all. Now he lives to serve God the Father, sitting at his right hand, ruling over all things for the good of the church and ushering in the Last Day, when he will complete his work by judging the world and creating a new heaven and a new earth.

This sense of finality—Jesus’ final victory over death and a life of ongoing service to his heavenly Father is now transferred to us. Paul tells us to “count” ourselves, that is, to evaluate our situation as children of God and realize that the same is true for us. We died with Christ, and so we are dead to sin. We were raised to life with Christ, and now we live to serve God.

This is very good news. At the Last Supper, Jesus said to his disciples, “I am the vine; you are the branches. If a man remains in me and I in him, he will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing” (John 15:5). But what does it mean to remain in Jesus? To believe in him and to believe that he loves us and is our Savior? Certainly! But notice in Romans 6 how Paul expands on that basic gospel. We remain in Christ when we think about the fact that we joined him in his death and resurrection. We remain in him when we ¢onsider the result of dying with him—our old nature died and

we were taken out of the realm where sin can touch us. And we remain in him when we realize that we are joined in his resurrection—enjoying a new life free from sin in which we can serve the Lord.

Based on this gospel of death and life, Paul encourages us to serve the Lord. But the gospel does not simply motivate us to do something. It is also the message about an entirely new state of being that we enjoy in Christ. Because this is so— because the gospel has made such a radical change in our status before God, indeed, in our very existence in this life—this is what we are to do:

Deo not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey tts evil desires. Do not offer the parts of your body to sin, as instruments of wickedness, but rather offer yourselves to God, as those who have been brought from death to life; and offer the parts of your body to him as instruments of righteousness. (6:12,13)

Here Paul gives us general directions on what to do. The specifics will come later. Notice how our death and life in Christ are the foundation of our lives of faith. That is what we are: people who have been brought from death to life. He doesn't want us to forget it, as we are so prone to do. We are to serve the Lord for this reason—not for any personal advantage we might gain from doing so, but because we have died with Christ and are now alive with him.

The final verse of this section hints at where Paul is going in the last part of chapter 6 and the first part of chapter 7. Paul writes, “Sin shall not be your master, because you are not under law, but under grace” (6:14). This verse leads us into the topic of the next chapter, so we'll wait until then to talk about it.
