# Introduction

God has made us new creations by uniting us with Jesus’ death and resurrection, by giving us the gift of righteousness, and by releasing us from the law. We are now alive. Why are we now alive? Paul explains why in Romans 8:13: Through the Spirit we can and are putting to death the misdeeds of the body. We are doing this because we have in us the Spirit of Christ, whom we have received by faith. The Spirit has made us children of God by virtue of Christ’s life, death, and resurrection. What we are as new creations is so intimately bound together with what Jesus has done for us that we cannot think of ourselves apart from his death and resurrection.

We are not saved by what we do, nor are we saved because we are serving the Lord. However, Scripture often describes

our relationship with God and our hope of eternal life in terms of what we are as new creatures. In other words, many sections of Scripture speak of the blessings we have in Christ as coming to us because of what we do for God.

This is one of the most wonderful ways Scripture encourages us to strive to serve the Lord. Scripture encourages us to remember our roots—Jesus’ death and righteousness—and like branches growing out of the vine, to rejoice in the fruit we are producing and in the blessings we are receiving.

We have already focused on two of the passages that give this encouragement. In Romans 8:1 Paul told us that we in whom the Spirit of life is working are not condemned. Romans 8:13 spoke about the eternal life we have as people who, through the Spirit, put to death the misdeeds of the body. These truths—so closely tied with Jesus’ cross and empty tomb—motivate us to give ourselves to the Lord.

These passages, though, are some of the most difficult passages in the New Testament. True Christians want nothing other than the comfort of knowing that they are free from sin and guilt and that they can be absolutely sure of eternal life. True Christians strive to hold on to the message of forgiveness as their only way to eternal life. The passages that speak of these blessings in terms of what we do might strike us as foreign. We might have trouble understanding them. Sometimes we ignore them. Sometimes we reinterpret them to fit easier passages that speak of God’s blessings in terms of Jesus’ grace and forgiveness. We do this because we do not want to fall into work-righteousness. The casual reader may jump to the conclusion that these passages, in fact, do teach righteousness by works. Not only casual readers but Christian scholars have interpreted these passages as teaching that God does not bless us by his grace alone but because we have earned his blessings with our good lives.

We must always remember the perfectly clear passages in the Bible about salvation by grace through faith in Christ’s work for us. It should be impossible for us to misinterpret passages that promise God’s grace and eternal life to those who obey the law. Yet so many do misinterpret these passages, twisting and turning them into obstacles to gospel motivation.

Our sinful nature willingly goes along with these misinterpretations, coming away with a spirit of despair over our inability to serve God well enough or a spirit of pride in the mistaken notion that we have kept God’s commandments well enough to earn his grace.

In spite of the misinterpretations, the passages that link our new creation with God’s blessings should not be ignored or reinterpreted. Properly understood, these passages encourage us to serve the Lord and are part of gospel motivation. We are what we are as God’s people only because God has led us to believe the gospel of Jesus’ death and resurrection. These passages rest on the truth of what Christ has made us to be. They help us view ourselves and our lives as the Lord wants us to view them. They help us appreciate what God has made us to be and what an important place our new lives play in God’s will for his people.

Passages that link God’s blessings to the fruits of our new creations are repeated throughout the New Testament in various ways. We must come to the point where we can speak as Scripture speaks, yet be content that we are not promoting work-righteousness. Again, Romans 8:12-16 has provided the key for doing this.

In this chapter of our book, we will look at passages that fall into three general categories: (1) We will look at passages that speak of our relationship to God in terms of how we live, that is, our good works. These passages encourage us to remain firm in our faith so that we can live in the Spirit and continually serve the Lord. (2) We will look at passages that speak of eternal life in terms of how we live. These passages also encourage us to remain firm in our faith so that as new creations we stand before God pure and holy in Christ. (3) We will look at passages that encourage us to persevere in godly living by reminding us that the Lord will reward the good we do.
