# We are righteous in Christ

The book of 1 John contains many similar statements. John weaves together what Jesus has done for us (that’s always first) with the love we show to others. He joins the two so intimately that if we see the fruits of faith in our lives, particularly love, we can be sure we are children of God:

You know that he appeared so that he might take away our sins. And in him is no sin. No one who lives in him keeps on sinning. No one who continues to sin has either seen him or known him. Dear children, do not let anyone lead you astray. He who does what is right is righteous, just as he [He] is righteous. He who does what is sinful is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the devil’s work. No one who is born of God will continue to sin, because God’s seed remains in him; he cannot go on sinning, because he has been born of God. This is how we know who the children of God are and who the children of the devil are: Anyone who does not do what is right is not a child of God; nor is anyone who does not love his brother. (1 John 3:5-10)

“God’s seed” is simply another term for our new creation. The seed of the gospel has been planted in the believer’s heart. That seed has become a plant. A plant must grow, or it will die. A plant must produce fruit; that’s its nature. To live in sin and to keep on sinning is impossible for Christians; it goes against their nature. John says, “He who does what is right is righteous, just as he is righteous.” The NIV translation might have capitalized “he.” Jesus has been referred to as “he” in the preceding verses. The meaning is that if we do the right thing, it is clear that we are righteous in Christ.
