# It is clear that we are justified

The apostle James was dealing with people who had fallen into the false belief that as long as they believed in Christ, doing good works in their lives was not important. Since they considered themselves righteous before God, they thought there was no need for righteousness in their lives. They considered themselves justified, but there was no evidence of that fact. So James made it clear to them that faith without works is dead:

What good is it, my brothers, if a man claims to have faith but has no deeds? Can such faith save him? Suppose a brother or sister is without clothes and daily food. If one of you says to him, “Go, I wish you well; keep warm and weil fed,” but does nothing about his physical needs, what good is it? In the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead. But someone will say, “You have faith; I have deeds.” Show me your faith without deeds, and I will show you my faith by what I do. You believe that there is one God. Good! Even the demons believe that—and shudder. You foolish man, do you want evidence that faith without deeds is useless? Was not our ancestor Abraham considered righteous for what he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar? You see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he did. And the scripture was fulfilled that says, “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness,” and he was called God’s friend. You see that a person is justified by what he does and not by faith alone. (James 2:14-24)

James’ point is simple. Faith without works is no faith at all. He proves this by going back into the Old Testament and citing the example of Abraham. Abraham, of course, is the most important example of faith in the Old Testament. Saint Paul spends much of Romans 4 talking about Abraham’s faith. He points out that Abraham believed in God and that his faith is what made him righteous. Paul also points out that Abraham received the promise by faith “so that it may be by grace and may be guaranteed to all Abraham’s offspring—not only to those who are of the law but also to those who are of the faith of Abraham” (Romans 4:16). Yet Abraham is also one of the best examples of a person who became a new creation by faith, showed to the Lord and to the world what the Lord had made him to be, and then was blessed by God on the basis of what he did.

We see this from Genesis 22 and 26. Up until Genesis 22, we hear nothing of Abraham’s works as the reason God blessed him. God’s blessings were promises, given to Abraham completely apart from anything he did. If nothing else, Genesis 12 through 21 make it clear that every single promise God gave to Abraham came by faith alone. In Genesis 22, however, these promises are spoken of for the first time as belonging to Abraham because of what he did. After Abraham nearly sacrificed his son Isaac, the Lord said to him, “Now I know that you fear God, because you have not withheld from me your son, your only son... . I will surely bless you... and through your offspring all nations on earth will be blessed, because you have obeyed me” (Genesis 22:12-18). The promises had not changed. Nor had God. His promises were still promises. But now God was linking the fulfillment of his promises to what Abraham did in faith. Later, when God passed on to Isaac the blessings he had given to Abraham, he put it this way: “I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and will give them all these lands, and through your offspring all nations on earth will be blessed, because Abraham obeyed me and kept my requirements, my commands, my decrees and my laws” (Genesis 26:4,5). Here God’s statement is even more pointed.

Rather than obscuring the matter, James clears up what would seem to be a rather difficult Old Testament passage. Abraham’s faith was a living faith. Abraham was a new creation, made that way because of God’s promises. No one could see Abraham’s faith until God tested him. His faith burst forth in service, and God blessed his obedience. God saw his faith. The world saw his faith. Without works this would have been impossible. If Abraham had disobeyed God and refused to sacrifice Isaac, he would have been telling the world that he didn’t believe; he would have forfeited the promises, and he would have been lost. But his faith was made complete by his works, that is, everything the Bible says about Abraham’s faith is true because Abraham was a new creation, which became apparent at this time. In fact, when God transferred the promises to Isaac, he still had in mind the evidence of Abraham’s faith and even tied his promises to Isaac with what Abraham had done by faith.

Although James is rebuking those whose faith, in many cases, was dead, his words are still motivation for us. We want to imitate Abraham. James describes what the Lord’s promises had done in Abraham’s heart. We ask the Lord to do the same in our hearts and continue to enable our faith to be complete by our works. If that does not happen, our faith is dead and we are dead to God’s promises. But if that happens, we will be blessed.

Just to repeat: The above passages link our lives of service with the promises we normally associate with the gospel. But this is not work-righteousness. It is simply an encouragement to live in line with the righteousness we have in Christ, an encouragement to live according to our new man, which is there only because we know Jesus’ forgiveness. Admittedly, some of these passages are difficult. Yet they are part of God’s Word, meant not to trouble our faith but to spur us on to live our faith, which we can do because we are in Christ.
