# Our lives of service and eternal life

Scripture also ties our hope of eternal life to what we do. We return to 1 John and look at a section in which John speaks in these terms:

God is love. Whoever lives in love lives in God, and God in him. In this way, love is made complete among us so that we will have confidence on the day of judgment, because in this world we are like him. There is no fear in love. But perfect love drives out fear, because fear has to do with punishment. The one who fears is not made perfect in love. We love because he first loved us. If anyone says, “I love God,” yet hates his brother, he is a har. For anyone who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love God, whom he has not seen. (1 John 4:16-20)

John reminds us that God is love. If we live in love, then we are united with God and God with us. When this happens, God’s love is made complete in us, that is, it is producing fruits of faith in our lives. When this happens, we can be confident on the day of judgment. Why? Because in this world we are like our Lord. We can look at ourselves and see people who are imitating God’s love. Again, read all of this in the context of Romans 6 through 8. The power of the gospel is at work in our hearts. John reminds us that God loves us, and so our lives cannot help but reflect his love for us. If we see our hearts empty of love, we have every reason to fear the judgment, for if that is the case, we have given up our faith. George Stoeckhardt, a great 19th century Lutheran Scripture commentator from the Missouri Synod, put it this way:

This is said [verse 17] of the love that is with us, that dwells in us. It is our love, which has its origin in God. This love has reached its end and purpose when it enables us to face Judgment Day with confidence. By this everyone can test himself whether he really possesses this love, as he considers in what frame of mind he approaches Judgment Day. Whoever has this God-born love is not frightened at the thought of Judgment Day. He approaches this Day with fearless confidence. He enters the presence of the great Judge unafraid... . We must remember that the Apostle at this place does not say how Christians, terrified about their sins, should meet the thought of Judgment Day. Only by faith in Christ, which apprehends the merits of Christ, can one stand before the Judge. That is here presupposed. From such faith necessarily flows love. That faith in Christ quiets our heart against sin, we have read earlier in this epistle.

Yet, what the Apostle writes here is meant to test our faith. Are we terrified by the thought of Judgment! We ought not be. Our love is an evidence of faith. (Lectures on the Three Letters of John, translated by Hugo W. Degner. Atkin, Minnesota: Hope Press, 1963, pp. 107-109)

In light of how some confessional Lutheran commentators deal with passages like this, it is important to hear how Stoeckhardt simply lets the passage mean what the words say. What too often happens is that confessional Lutherans explain these passages by virtually ignoring the emphasis on works and basing everything on Christ’s work for us. They do not take into consideration that through the gospel God has made us new creatures and that Scripture often bases God’s rewards, now and in eternity, on what God has made us to be. Lutheran commentators can hardly be faulted for this. These passages are what all proponents of salvation by works have thrown in the faces of Lutherans for centuries, using these passages to “prove” that salvation does not come through faith alone but through works. Yet basing all God’s blessings directly on Christ’s work is undermining God’s way of leading us into greater service. This is not a matter of forgetting Christ and focusing on works. Rather, it is a matter of acknowledging what an immediate impact Christ’s werk has and, of necessity, must have on our lives. It is acknowledging that in Christ we are serving God and that we have an obligation to our new nature to live according to it. And we are blessed if we carry out this obligation.

If these passages make you feel uneasy or seem to pull you back under the curse of the law, you are not understanding them correctly and I will take the blame for not explaining them as clearly as I could. But the issue is real. We must wrestle with the passages, drawing out their natural meaning from what the words say.

The key to understanding these passages is Romans 6 through 8. These chapters come after Paul has preached the clear message of salvation by faith in Jesus’ work alone. They come after Paul has preached the objective nature of Jesus’ work, that is, that his work on the cross covered the sins of all people. When Paul begins talking about sanctification, he does

not forget about justification in Christ. Rather, he builds on it, showing its natural outgrowth in our becoming new people, new in our relation to God, new in our relationship to the law (we are free from it) because we now have Christ’s righteousness (and are slaves to it). The gospel—our being grounded in Christ’s righteousness and having a sure hope of eternal life in our Savior—is the end of the line when it comes to our hope. But it is not the end of the line. The gospel makes us new creations. Where there is no new creation, there is no salvation or any of the other blessings of God.

The key to understanding these passages is to know the gospel better and better. The more we know God’s love and find our hope in his love alone, the less we will be tempted to turn these passages into law passages and the more we will be enabled to take them to heart in the way they were intended. The more we rest in the Savior, the more we will rejoice in the fact that we are new people in him and the more we will be able to fit these passages into our day-to-day lives as God’s people.

The following passages also speak of God giving eternal blessings to those who, by faith, live for him. We will not comment on them. Simply read them in the context of what we have already discussed.

It will be good for those servants whose master finds them ready, even if he comes in the second or third watch of the night. (Luke 12:38)

The man who loves his life will lose it, while the man who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. Whoever serves me must follow me; and where I am, my servant also will be. My Father will honor the one who serves me. (John 12:25,26)

God “will give to each person according to what he has done.” To those who by persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life. But for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil, there will be wrath and anger. There will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile; but glory, honor and peace for everyone who does good: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile. For God does not show favoritism. (Romans 2:6-11)

I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. Now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will award to me on that day—and not only to me, but also to all who have longed for his appearing. (2 Timothy 4:7,8)

Do not be deceived: God cannot be mocked. A man reaps what he sows. The one who sows to please his sinful nature, from that nature will reap destruction; the one who sows to please the Spirit, from the Spirit will reap eternal life. Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up. (Galatians 6:7-9)

Just as he who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do; for it is written: “Be holy, because J am holy.” Since you call on a Father who judges each man’s work impartially, live your lives as strangers here in reverent fear. For you know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you from your forefathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or defect. He was chosen before the creation of the world, but was revealed in these last times for your sake. (1 Peter 1:15-20)

Finally, Paul encourages the Corinthians to live with a view to eternal life:

We make it our goal to please him, whether we are at home in the body or away from it. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may receive what is due him for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad. (2 Corinthians 5:9,10)
