# January 13

## Psalmody

1 Blessèd is the one whose transgression is for- | given,* whose sin is | covered.
2 Blessèd is the man against whom the LORD counts no in- | iquity,* and in whose spirit there is | no deceit.
3 For when I kept silent, my bones wast- | ed away* through my groaning | all day long.
4 For day and night your hand was heavy up- | on me;* my strength was dried up as by the heat of | summer.
5 I acknowledged my sin to you, and I did not cover my in- | iquity;* I said, “I will confess my transgressions to the LORD,” and you forgave the iniquity | of my sin.
6 Therefore let everyone who is godly offer prayer to you at a time when you | may be found;* surely in the rush of great waters, they shall not | reach him.
7 You are a hiding place for me; you preserve me from | trouble;* you surround me with shouts of de- | liverance.
—Psalm 32:1–7
Additional Psalm: Psalm 51

## Old Testament Reading: Ezekiel 36:13–28

[Prophecy to the Mountains of Israel]

13Thus says the Lord GOD: Because they say to you, ‘You devour people, and you bereave your nation of children,’ 14therefore you shall no longer devour people and no longer bereave your nation of children, declares the Lord GOD. 15And I will not let you hear anymore the reproach of the nations, and you shall no longer bear the disgrace of the peoples and no longer cause your nation to stumble, declares the Lord GOD.”

The LORD’s Concern for His Holy Name

16The word of the LORD came to me: 17“Son of man, when the house of Israel lived in their own land, they defiled it by their ways and their deeds. Their ways before me were like the uncleanness of a woman in her menstrual impurity. 18So I poured out my wrath upon them for the blood that they had shed in the land, for the idols with which they had defiled it. 19I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through the countries. In accordance with their ways and their deeds I judged them. 20But when they came to the nations, wherever they came, they profaned my holy name, in that people said of them, ‘These are the people of the LORD, and yet they had to go out of his land.’ 21But I had concern for my holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations to which they came.

I Will Put My Spirit Within You

22“Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: It is not for your sake, O house of Israel, that I am about to act, but for the sake of my holy name, which you have profaned among the nations to which you came. 23And I will vindicate the holiness of my great name, which has been profaned among the nations, and which you have profaned among them. And the nations will know that I am the LORD, declares the Lord GOD, when through you I vindicate my holiness before their eyes. 24I will take you from the nations and gather you from all the countries and bring you into your own land. 25I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you shall be clean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols I will cleanse you. 26And I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you. And I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh. 27And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes and be careful to obey my rules. 28You shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, and you shall be my people, and I will be your God.”

## New Testament Reading: Romans 4:1–25

Abraham Justified by Faith

1What then shall we say was gained by Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh? 2For if Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about, but not before God. 3For what does the Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness.” 4Now to the one who works, his wages are not counted as a gift but as his due. 5And to the one who does not work but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted as righteousness, 6just as David also speaks of the blessing of the one to whom God counts righteousness apart from works: 7“Blessed are those whose lawless deeds are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; 8blessed is the man against whom the Lord will not count his sin.” 9Is this blessing then only for the circumcised, or also for the uncircumcised? We say that faith was counted to Abraham as righteousness. 10How then was it counted to him? Was it before or after he had been circumcised? It was not after, but before he was circumcised. 11He received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised. The purpose was to make him the father of all who believe without being circumcised, so that righteousness would be counted to them as well, 12and to make him the father of the circumcised who are not merely circumcised but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had before he was circumcised.

The Promise Realized Through Faith

13For the promise to Abraham and his offspring that he would be heir of the world did not come through the law but through the righteousness of faith. 14For if it is the adherents of the law who are to be the heirs, faith is null and the promise is void. 15For the law brings wrath, but where there is no law there is no transgression. 16That is why it depends on faith, in order that the promise may rest on grace and be guaranteed to all his offspring—not only to the adherent of the law but also to the one who shares the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all, 17as it is written, “I have made you the father of many nations”—in the presence of the God in whom he believed, who gives life to the dead and calls into existence the things that do not exist. 18In hope he believed against hope, that he should become the father of many nations, as he had been told, “So shall your offspring be.” 19He did not weaken in faith when he considered his own body, which was as good as dead (since he was about a hundred years old), or when he considered the barrenness of Sarah’s womb. 20No distrust made him waver concerning the promise of God, but he grew strong in his faith as he gave glory to God, 21fully convinced that God was able to do what he had promised. 22That is why his faith was “counted to him as righteousness.” 23But the words “it was counted to him” were not written for his sake alone, 24but for ours also. It will be counted to us who believe in him who raised from the dead Jesus our Lord, 25who was delivered up for our trespasses and raised for our justification.

## Writing

Here [Philippians 3:7–11] Paul clearly explains the righteousness of faith and what it consists of: that God looks at His Son and for His sake permits us not to suffer for our sins; Instead, He regards us as righteous, as if we were neither sinners nor corrupted by nature. He looks at the power of Christ’s resurrection and our sharing of His suffering, for Christ’s suffering and death are our death, and we become like Him through faith; we enjoy the power of His resurrection. Similarly he writes in Romans 4(:25): “He was put to death for our trespasses and was raised for our justification.” That means: As soon as Christ rose from the dead, the power of His resurrection was so great that whoever believed on Him was no longer considered a sinner but was considered righteous in God’s sight—for he had put on the obedience of Christ, which He rendered the Father even unto death. It is written (Gal. 3:27): “For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.” Again (Col. 2:12–14): “You were buried with Him in baptism, in which you were also raised with Him through faith, which God effects, God, who raised Him from the dead. And you, who were dead in sin, God made alive with Him, having forgiven us all our sins, having canceled the bond which stood against us.” From all this it is plain and clear that when Holy Scripture speaks of the righteousness of faith and of our justification in God’s sight, nothing else can be understood but this: (1) how we are declared utterly free in God’s sight of our sins, which we have committed, which still cling to our flesh, which we cannot completely lay aside as long as we live in this world; and (2) what God looks upon and why He will not regard us as sinners and does not cast us away and condemn us eternally as sinful, disobedient children: because of the obedience of Christ, which He rendered to His Father even unto death as the satisfaction and payment for our sins and as our righteousness.
—Jacob Andreae

## Hymnody

Thy work alone, O Christ,
   Can ease this weight of sin;
Thy blood alone, O Lamb of God,
   Can give me peace within.
—Not What These Hands Have Done (LSB 567:3)

## Prayer of the Day

O Lord, keep Your family the Church continually in the true faith that, relying on the hope of Your heavenly grace, we may ever be defended by Your mighty power; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L17)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Large Catechism III 25–34
