# January 19

## Psalmody

1 O LORD, who shall sojourn | in your tent?* Who shall dwell on your | holy hill?
2 He who walks blamelessly and does | what is right* and speaks truth | in his heart;
3 who does not slander with his tongue and does no evil to his | neighbor,* nor takes up a reproach a- | gainst his friend; 4 in whose eyes a vile person is despised, but who honors those who | fear the LORD;* who swears to his own hurt and | does not change; 5 who does not put out his money at interest and does not take a bribe against the | innocent.* He who does these things shall nev- | er be moved.
—Psalm 15
Additional Psalm: Psalm 126

## Old Testament Reading: Ezekiel 44:1–16, 23–29

The Gate for the Prince

1Then he brought me back to the outer gate of the sanctuary, which faces east. And it was shut. 2And the LORD said to me, “This gate shall remain shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall enter by it, for the LORD, the God of Israel, has entered by it. Therefore it shall remain shut. 3Only the prince may sit in it to eat bread before the LORD. He shall enter by way of the vestibule of the gate, and shall go out by the same way.” 4Then he brought me by way of the north gate to the front of the temple, and I looked, and behold, the glory of the LORD filled the temple of the LORD. And I fell on my face. 5And the LORD said to me, “Son of man, mark well, see with your eyes, and hear with your ears all that I shall tell you concerning all the statutes of the temple of the LORD and all its laws. And mark well the entrance to the temple and all the exits from the sanctuary. 6And say to the rebellious house, to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: O house of Israel, enough of all your abominations, 7in admitting foreigners, uncircumcised in heart and flesh, to be in my sanctuary, profaning my temple, when you offer to me my food, the fat and the blood. You have broken my covenant, in addition to all your abominations. 8And you have not kept charge of my holy things, but you have set others to keep my charge for you in my sanctuary. 9“Thus says the Lord GOD: No foreigner, uncircumcised in heart and flesh, of all the foreigners who are among the people of Israel, shall enter my sanctuary. 10But the Levites who went far from me, going astray from me after their idols when Israel went astray, shall bear their punishment. 11They shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the temple and ministering in the temple. They shall slaughter the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before the people, to minister to them. 12Because they ministered to them before their idols and became a stumbling block of iniquity to the house of Israel, therefore I have sworn concerning them, declares the Lord GOD, and they shall bear their punishment. 13They shall not come near to me, to serve me as priest, nor come near any of my holy things and the things that are most holy, but they shall bear their shame and the abominations that they have committed. 14Yet I will appoint them to keep charge of the temple, to do all its service and all that is to be done in it.

Rules for Levitical Priests

15“But the Levitical priests, the sons of Zadok, who kept the charge of my sanctuary when the people of Israel went astray from me, shall come near to me to minister to me. And they shall stand before me to offer me the fat and the blood, declares the Lord GOD. 16They shall enter my sanctuary, and they shall approach my table, to minister to me, and they shall keep my charge.… 23They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and the common, and show them how to distinguish between the unclean and the clean. 24In a dispute, they shall act as judges, and they shall judge it according to my judgments. They shall keep my laws and my statutes in all my appointed feasts, and they shall keep my Sabbaths holy. 25They shall not defile themselves by going near to a dead person. However, for father or mother, for son or daughter, for brother or unmarried sister they may defile themselves. 26After he has become clean, they shall count seven days for him. 27And on the day that he goes into the Holy Place, into the inner court, to minister in the Holy Place, he shall offer his sin offering, declares the Lord GOD. 28“This shall be their inheritance: I am their inheritance: and you shall give them no possession in Israel; I am their possession. 29They shall eat the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and every devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs.”

## New Testament Reading: Romans 9:1–18

God’s Sovereign Choice

1I am speaking the truth in Christ—I am not lying; my conscience bears me witness in the Holy Spirit—2that I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart. 3For I could wish that I myself were accursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my kinsmen according to the flesh. 4They are Israelites, and to them belong the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the worship, and the promises. 5To them belong the patriarchs, and from their race, according to the flesh, is the Christ who is God over all, blessed forever. Amen. 6But it is not as though the word of God has failed. For not all who are descended from Israel belong to Israel, 7and not all are children of Abraham because they are his offspring, but “Through Isaac shall your offspring be named.” 8This means that it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as offspring. 9For this is what the promise said: “About this time next year I will return, and Sarah shall have a son.” 10And not only so, but also when Rebekah had conceived children by one man, our forefather Isaac, 11though they were not yet born and had done nothing either good or bad—in order that God’s purpose of election might continue, not because of works but because of him who calls—12she was told, “The older will serve the younger.” 13As it is written, “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.” 14What shall we say then? Is there injustice on God’s part? By no means! 15For he says to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.” 16So then it depends not on human will or exertion, but on God, who has mercy. 17For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, “For this very purpose I have raised you up, that I might show my power in you, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.” 18So then he has mercy on whomever he wills, and he hardens whomever he wills.

## Writing

Glory to You, who by Your cross has taken away the heathenism in which both the circumcised and uncircumcised were caused to stumble! Praise to You, the Medicine of life, who has converted all who are baptized to Him who is life of all and Lord of all! The lost who are found bless You, for by finding the lost, You have given joy to the angels that are found and were not lost. The uncircumcised praise You, for in Your peace the enmity that was between is swallowed up. For You received in Your flesh the outward sign of circumcision, through which the uncircumcised formerly accounted as not Yours are now Your own people. You made the circumcision of the heart Your sign by which the circumcised were made known that they were not Your people. For You came to Your own, and Your own received You not; and by this they were made known that they were not Your people. But through Your mercy, those to whom You did not come cry out after You, so that You would satisfy them with the crumbs that fall from the children’s table. God was sent from the Godhead to come and convict the graven images that they were no gods. And when He took away from them the name of God that had adorned them, then the blemishes of their persons appeared. These were their blemishes: they have eyes but do not see; they have ears but do not hear. Your preaching persuaded their many worshipers to exchange their many gods for the one God. By that, You took away the name of godhead from the idols. Worship was withdrawn along with the name, that is, the worship bound up with the name, for worship also attends on the name of God. Because, then, worship was also rendered to the name by all the Gentiles, at the last the worshipful name shall be gathered in completely to its Lord, so that it may be fulfilled that “all things shall be subjected to Him” [1 Corinthians 15:27].
—Ephraim Syrus

## Hymnody

Let the earth now praise the Lord,
Who has truly kept His word
And at last to us did send
Christ, the sinner’s help and friend.
—Let the Earth Now Praise the Lord (LSB 352:1)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, Your almighty power is made known chiefly in showing mercy. Grant us the fullness of Your grace that we may be called to repentance and made partakers of Your heavenly treasures; through Your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (B67)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Large Catechism III 99–111
