# February 9

## Psalmody

1 The LORD is my | shepherd;* I | shall not want.
2 He makes me lie down in green | pastures.* He leads me beside still | waters.
3 He re- | stores my soul.* He leads me in paths of righteousness for his | name’s sake.
4 Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are | with me;* your rod and your staff, they | comfort me.
5 You prepare a table before me in the presence of my | enemies;* you anoint my head with oil; my cup | overflows.
—Psalm 23:1–5
Additional Psalm: Psalm 87

## Old Testament Reading: Job 6:1–13

Job Replies: My Complaint Is Just 1Then Job answered and said: 2“Oh that my vexation were weighed, and all my calamity laid in the balances! 3For then it would be heavier than the sand of the sea; therefore my words have been rash. 4For the arrows of the Almighty are in me; my spirit drinks their poison; the terrors of God are arrayed against me. 5Does the wild donkey bray when he has grass, or the ox low over his fodder? 6Can that which is tasteless be eaten without salt, or is there any taste in the juice of the mallow? 7My appetite refuses to touch them; they are as food that is loathsome to me. 8“Oh that I might have my request, and that God would fulfill my hope, 9that it would please God to crush me, that he would let loose his hand and cut me off! 10This would be my comfort; I would even exult in pain unsparing, for I have not denied the words of the Holy One. 11What is my strength, that I should wait? And what is my end, that I should be patient? 12Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh bronze? 13Have I any help in me, when resource is driven from me?”

## New Testament Reading: John 3:1–21

You Must Be Born Again

1Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. 2This man came to Jesus by night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do unless God is with him.” 3Jesus answered him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.” 4Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother’s womb and be born?” 5Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. 6That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. 7Do not marvel that I said to you, ‘You must be born again.’ 8The wind blows where it wishes, and you hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.” 9Nicodemus said to him, “How can these things be?” 10Jesus answered him, “Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you do not understand these things? 11Truly, truly, I say to you, we speak of what we know, and bear witness to what we have seen, but you do not receive our testimony. 12If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe, how can you believe if I tell you heavenly things? 13No one has ascended into heaven except he who descended from heaven, the Son of Man. 14And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, 15that whoever believes in him may have eternal life.

For God So Loved the World

16“For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. 17For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him. 18Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God. 19And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil. 20For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his works should be exposed. 21But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.”

## Writing

[In an ongoing debate, Hilary of Poitiers defines the term Only- begotten.] And first let us see whether the word means, as you assert, a perfect creature of God: Only-begotten being equivalent to perfect, and Son a synonym for creature. But John described the Only-begotten Son as God, not as a perfect creature. His words, “Which is in the bosom of the Father,” show that he anticipated these blasphemous designations. Indeed, he had heard his Lord say, “For God so loved the world that He gave His Only- begotten Son, that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have everlasting life.” God, who loved the world, gave His Only-begotten Son as a manifest token of His love. If the evidence of His love is this, that He bestowed a creature upon creatures, gave a worldly being on the world’s behalf, granted one raised up from nothing for the redemption of objects equally raised up from nothing, this cheap and petty sacrifice is a poor assurance of His favor toward us. Gifts of price are the evidence of affection, the greatness of the surrender of the greatness of the love. God, who loved the world, gave not an adopted Son, but His own, His Only- begotten. Here is personal interest, true Sonship, sincerity; not creation or adoption or pretence. Herein is the proof of His love and affection, that He gave His own, His Only-begotten Son.
—Hilary of Poitiers

## Hymnody

God loved the world so that He gave
His only Son the lost to save,
That all who would in Him believe
Should everlasting life receive.
—God Loved the World So That He Gave (LSB 571:1)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, You see that of ourselves we have no strength. By Your mighty power defend us from all adversities that may happen to the body and from all evil thoughts that may assault and hurt the soul; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L24)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles II IV 10–16

[10] This teaching shows forcefully that the pope is the true Endchrist or Antichrist [1 John 2:18]. He has exalted himself above and opposed himself against Christ. For he will not permit Christians to be saved without his power, which, nevertheless, is nothing, and is neither ordained nor commanded by God.

[11] This is, properly speaking, how he “exalts himself against every so-called god” as Paul says (2 Thessalonians 2:4). Even the Turks or the Tartars, great enemies of Christians as they are, do not do this. They take bodily tribute and obedience from Christians, but they allow whoever wishes to believe in Christ.

[12] The pope, however, bans this faith. He says that to be saved a person must obey him. This we are unwilling to do, even though we must die in God’s name because of this.

[13] This all proceeds from the pope wishing to be called the supreme head of the Christian Church by divine right. So he had to make himself equal and superior to Christ. He had to have himself proclaimed the head and then the lord of the Church, and finally of the whole world. This makes him simply God on earth, to the point that he has dared to issue commands even to the angels in heaven.

[14] When we distinguish the pope’s teaching from, or compare it to, Holy Scripture, it is clear that the pope’s teaching at its best has been taken from the imperial and heathen law. It deals with political matters and decisions or rights, as the decretals show. His law also teaches ceremonies about churches, garments, food, persons, and childish, theatrical, and comical things without measure. But in all of this, nothing at all is taught about Christ, faith, and God’s commandments. Finally, the papacy is nothing else than the devil himself, because above and against God the pope pushes his falsehoods about Masses, purgatory, the monastic life, one’s own works, and false worship. (This, in fact, is the papacy.) He also condemns, murders, and tortures all Christians who do not exalt and honor ‹his› abominations above all things. Therefore, just as we cannot worship the devil himself as Lord and God, so we cannot endure his apostle—the pope or Antichrist—in his rule as head or lord. For what his papal government really consists of (as I have very clearly shown in many books) is to lie and kill and destroy body and soul eternally.

[15] They will have enough to condemn in the council in these four articles. For they cannot and will not concede to us even the least point in one of these articles. Of this we can be certain. We must be sure and consider the hope that Christ, our Lord, has attacked His adversary. He will press and attack him both by His Spirit and His coming. Amen.

[16] In the council we will not stand before the emperor or the political ruler, as at Augsburg (where the emperor published a most gracious edict, and caused matters to be heard kindly). Instead, we will appear before the pope and devil himself, who intends to listen to nothing, but will just condemn, murder, and force us to idolatry. Therefore, we should not here kiss his feet, or say, “you are my gracious lord.” Rather, we should say as the angel [of the LORD] in Zechariah 3:2 said to the devil, “The LORD rebuke you, O Satan!”
