# February 6

## Psalmody

1 I cry a- | loud to God,* aloud to God, and he will | hear me.
2 In the day of my trouble I | seek the Lord;* in the night my hand is stretched out without wearying; my soul refuses to be | comforted.
3 When I remember | God, I moan;* when I meditate, my | spirit faints.
7 “Will the Lord spurn for- | ever,* and never again be | favorable?
8 Has his steadfast love for- | ever ceased?* Are his promises at an end | for all time?
9 Has God forgotten to be | gracious?* Has he in anger shut up his com- | passion?”
10 Then I said, “I will ap- | peal to this,* to the years of the right hand of the | Most High.”
11 I will remember the deeds | of the LORD;* yes, I will remember your won- | ders of old.
12 I will ponder | all your work,* and meditate on your | mighty deeds.
15 You with your arm redeemed your | people,* the children of Jacob and | Joseph.
—Psalm 77:1–3, 7–12, 15
Additional Psalm: Psalm 74

## Old Testament Reading: Job 3:11–26

[Job Laments His Birth]

11“Why did I not die at birth, come out from the womb and expire? 12Why did the knees receive me? Or why the breasts, that I should nurse? 13For then I would have lain down and been quiet; I would have slept; then I would have been at rest, 14with kings and counselors of the earth who rebuilt ruins for themselves, 15or with princes who had gold, who filled their houses with silver. 16Or why was I not as a hidden stillborn child, as infants who never see the light? 17There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest. 18There the prisoners are at ease together; they hear not the voice of the taskmaster. 19The small and the great are there, and the slave is free from his master. 20“Why is light given to him who is in misery, and life to the bitter in soul, 21who long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more than for hidden treasures, 22who rejoice exceedingly and are glad when they find the grave? 23Why is light given to a man whose way is hidden, whom God has hedged in? 24For my sighing comes instead of my bread, and my groanings are poured out like water. 25For the thing that I fear comes upon me, and what I dread befalls me. 26I am not at ease, nor am I quiet; I have no rest, but trouble comes.”

## New Testament Reading: John 1:35–51

Jesus Calls the First Disciples

35The next day again John was standing with two of his disciples, 36and he looked at Jesus as he walked by and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God!” 37The two disciples heard him say this, and they followed Jesus. 38Jesus turned and saw them following and said to them, “What are you seeking?” And they said to him, “Rabbi” (which means Teacher), “where are you staying?” 39He said to them, “Come and you will see.” So they came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day, for it was about the tenth hour. 40One of the two who heard John speak and followed Jesus was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. 41He first found his own brother Simon and said to him, “We have found the Messiah” (which means Christ). 42He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, “So you are Simon the son of John? You shall be called Cephas” (which means Peter).

Jesus Calls Philip and Nathanael

43The next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee. He found Philip and said to him, “Follow me.” 44Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 45Philip found Nathanael and said to him, “We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and also the prophets wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.” 46Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see.” 47Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said of him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit!” 48Nathanael said to him, “How do you know me?” Jesus answered him, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.” 49Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are the King of Israel!” 50Jesus answered him, “Because I said to you, ‘I saw you under the fig tree,’ do you believe? You will see greater things than these.” 51And he said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”

## Writing

21. A theology of glory calls evil good and good evil. A theology of the cross calls the thing what it actually is. This is clear: He who does not know Christ does not know God hidden in suffering. Therefore he prefers works to suffering, glory to the cross, strength to weakness, wisdom to folly, and, in general, good to evil. These are the people whom the apostle calls “enemies of the cross of Christ” [Phil. 3:18], for they hate the cross and suffering and love works and the glory of works. Thus they call the good of the cross evil and the evil of a deed good. God can be found only in suffering and the cross, as has already been said. Therefore the friends of the cross say that the cross is good and works are evil, for through the cross works are destroyed and the old Adam, who is especially edified by works, is crucified. It is impossible for a person not to be puffed up by his good works unless he has first been deflated and destroyed by suffering and evil until he knows that he is worthless and that his works are not his but God’s.
—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

All praise, O Lord, for Andrew,
   The first to welcome You,
Whose witness to his brother
   Named You Messiah true.
May we, with hearts kept open
   To You throughout the year,
Confess to friend and neighbor
   Your advent ever near.
—By All Your Saints in Warfare(LSB 517:5)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, by Your grace the apostle Andrew obeyed the call of Your Son to be a disciple. Grant us also to follow the same Lord Jesus Christ in heart and life, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F01)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles II II 11–24

[11] In addition to all this, this dragon’s tail [Revelation 12:3–4]—that is, the Mass—has begotten many vermin and a multitude of idolatries.

[12] First, purgatory. They carried their trade into purgatory by selling Masses for the souls of the dead. They started vigils; weekly, monthly, and yearly celebrations of funeral anniversaries; special services for the Common Week and All Souls’ Day; and soul baths. So the Mass is used almost solely for the dead, although Christ has instituted the Sacrament solely for the living. Therefore, purgatory, along with every service, rite, and commerce connected with it, should be regarded as nothing more than the devil’s ghost. For it conflicts with the chief article: only Christ, and not human works, are to help souls [Galatians 5:1]. Besides, God has commanded or assigned us nothing about the dead. Therefore, all this may be safely left out, even if it were not error and idolatry.

[13] The papists quote Augustine and some of the Church Fathers who are said to have written about purgatory. They think we do not understand why they spoke as they did. St. Augustine does not write that there is a purgatory. Nor does he have evidence from Scripture as a basis. Rather, he leaves it in doubt whether purgatory exists. He does say that his mother asked to be remembered at the altar or Sacrament. This is nothing but human devotion, indeed of individuals, and does not establish an article of faith, which is God’s privilege alone.

[14] Our papists, though, cite such human opinions so people will believe in their horrible, blasphemous, and cursed traffic in Masses for souls in purgatory. But they will never prove these things from Augustine. Once they have abolished the traffic in Masses for purgatory, which Augustine never dreamed of, then we can discuss whether to accept what Augustine said beyond Scripture and whether the dead should be remembered at the Eucharist.

[15] It will not do to frame articles of faith from the works or words of the holy Fathers. Otherwise, their kind of food, clothing, houses, and such, would have to become an article of faith, as was done with relics. The true rule is this: God’s Word shall establish articles of faith, and no one else, not even an angel can do so [Galatians 1:8].

[16] Second: Following these things, evil spirits have produced many wicked tricks by appearing as the souls of the departed [1 Samuel 28], and with unspeakable lies and tricks demanded Masses, vigils, pilgrimages, and other alms.

[17] All of this we were expected to receive as articles of faith and to live accordingly. The pope confirmed these things, as he did the Mass and all other abominations. Here, too, there must be no yielding or surrendering.

[18] Third, pilgrimages. Here, too, the forgiveness of sins and God’s grace were sought, for the Mass controlled everything. Pilgrimages, without God’s Word, have not been commanded. Nor are they necessary, since ‹the soul can be cared for› in a better way. These pilgrimages can be abandoned without any sin and danger. So why do they leave behind their own callings, their parishes, ‹their pastors,› God’s Word, their wives, their children, and such? These are ordained and commanded. Instead, they run after these unnecessary, uncertain, dangerous illusions of the devil.

[19] Perhaps the devil had been riding the pope, causing him to praise and establish these practices. By them, the people again and again revolted from Christ to their own works, and, worst of all, became idolaters. Furthermore, pilgrimages are neither necessary nor commanded, but are senseless, doubtful, and harmful. On this, too, there can be no yielding or surrendering.

[20] Let it be preached that pilgrimages are not necessary, but dangerous, and then see what will happen to them.

[21] Fourth, monastic societies. Monasteries, foundations, and representatives have assigned and transferred (by a legal contract and sale) all Masses, good works, and such, both for the living and the dead. This is nothing but a human trick, without God’s Word and entirely unnecessary and not commanded. It is also contrary to the chief article on redemption. Therefore, it cannot in any way be tolerated.

[22] Fifth, relics. So many falsehoods and such foolishness are found in the bones of dogs and horses that even the devil has laughed at such swindles. Relics should have been condemned long ago, even if there were some good in them, and all the more because they are without God’s Word. Since they are neither commanded nor counseled, relics are entirely unnecessary and useless.

[23] Worst of all, these relics have ‹been imagined to cause› indulgence and the forgiveness of sins. ‹People have revered them› as a good work and service of God, like the Mass and other such practices.

[24] Sixth: Here belong the precious indulgences granted—but only for money—both to the living and the dead. By indulgences, the miserable Judas, or pope, has sold Christ’s merit, along with the extra merits of all saints, of the entire Church, and such things.

All these things are unbearable. They are not only without God’s Word, are unnecessary and not commanded, but are against the chief article. For Christ’s merit is obtained not by our works or pennies, but from grace through faith, without money and merit [Ephesians 2:8–9]. It is offered not through the pope’s power, but through the preaching of God’s Word [1 Corinthians 1:21].
