# February 8

## Psalmody

1 Save me, | O God!* For the waters have come up | to my neck.
2 I sink in deep mire, where there is no | foothold;* I have come into deep waters, and the flood sweeps | over me.
3 I am weary with my crying out; my | throat is parched.* My eyes grow dim with waiting | for my God.
4 More in number than the hairs | of my head* are those who hate me with- | out cause; mighty are those who would destroy me, those who attack | me with lies.* What I did not steal must I | now restore?
8 I have become a stranger to my | brothers,* an alien to my | mother’s sons.
9 For zeal for your house has con- | sumed me,* and the reproaches of those who reproach you have fall- | en on me.
24 Pour out your indignation up- | on them,* and let your burning anger over- | take them.
29 But I am afflicted | and in pain;* let your salvation, O God, set | me on high!
30 I will praise the name of God | with a song;* I will magnify him with thanks- | giving.
—Psalm 69:1–4, 8–9, 24, 29–30
Additional Psalm: Psalm 122

## Old Testament Reading: Job 5:1–27

[Eliphaz Speaks: The Innocent Prosper] 1“Call now; is there anyone who will answer you? To which of the holy ones will you turn? 2Surely vexation kills the fool, and jealousy slays the simple. 3I have seen the fool taking root, but suddenly I cursed his dwelling. 4His children are far from safety; they are crushed in the gate, and there is no one to deliver them. 5The hungry eat his harvest, and he takes it even out of thorns, and the thirsty pant after his wealth. 6For affliction does not come from the dust, nor does trouble sprout from the ground, 7but man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward. 8“As for me, I would seek God, and to God would I commit my cause, 9who does great things and unsearchable, marvelous things without number: 10he gives rain on the earth and sends waters on the fields; 11he sets on high those who are lowly, and those who mourn are lifted to safety. 12He frustrates the devices of the crafty, so that their hands achieve no success. 13He catches the wise in their own craftiness, and the schemes of the wily are brought to a quick end. 14They meet with darkness in the daytime and grope at noonday as in the night. 15But he saves the needy from the sword of their mouth and from the hand of the mighty. 16So the poor have hope, and injustice shuts her mouth. 17“Behold, blessed is the one whom God reproves; therefore despise not the discipline of the Almighty. 18For he wounds, but he binds up; he shatters, but his hands heal. 19He will deliver you from six troubles; in seven no evil shall touch you. 20In famine he will redeem you from death, and in war from the power of the sword. 21You shall be hidden from the lash of the tongue, and shall not fear destruction when it comes. 22At destruction and famine you shall laugh, and shall not fear the beasts of the earth. 23For you shall be in league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with you. 24You shall know that your tent is at peace, and you shall inspect your fold and miss nothing. 25You shall know also that your offspring shall be many, and your descendants as the grass of the earth. 26You shall come to your grave in ripe old age, like a sheaf gathered up in its season. 27Behold, this we have searched out; it is true. Hear, and know it for your good.”

## New Testament Reading: John 2:13–25

Jesus Cleanses the Temple

13The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 14In the temple he found those who were selling oxen and sheep and pigeons, and the money-changers sitting there. 15And making a whip of cords, he drove them all out of the temple, with the sheep and oxen. And he poured out the coins of the money-changers and overturned their tables. 16And he told those who sold the pigeons, “Take these things away; do not make my Father’s house a house of trade.” 17His disciples remembered that it was written, “Zeal for your house will consume me.” 18So the Jews said to him, “What sign do you show us for doing these things?” 19Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” 20The Jews then said, “It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and will you raise it up in three days?” 21But he was speaking about the temple of his body. 22When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the Scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.

Jesus Knows What Is in Man

23Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, many believed in his name when they saw the signs that he was doing. 24But Jesus on his part did not entrust himself to them, because he knew all people 25and needed no one to bear witness about man, for he himself knew what was in man.

## Writing

[The fourth petition of the Lord’s Prayer] is especially directed also against our chief enemy, the devil. For all his thought and desire is to deprive us of all that we have from God or to hinder it. He is not satisfied to obstruct and destroy spiritual government by leading souls astray with his lies and bringing them under his power. He also prevents and hinders the stability of all government and honorable, peaceable relations on earth. There he causes so much contention, murder, treason, and war. He also causes lightning and hail to destroy grain and cattle, to poison the air, and so on. In short, he is sorry if anyone has a morsel of bread from God and eats it in peace. If it were in his power and our prayer (next to God) did not prevent him, we would not keep a straw in the field, a farthing in the house, yes, not even our life for an hour. This is especially true of those who have God’s Word and would like to be Christians.… God wishes to show us how He cares for us in all our need and faithfully provides also for our earthly support. He abundantly grants and preserves these things, even for the wicked and rogues [Matthew 5:45]. Yet, He wishes that we pray for these goods in order that we may recognize that we receive them from His hand and may feel His fatherly goodness toward us in them [Psalm 104:28; 145:16]. For when He withdraws His hand, nothing can prosper or be maintained in the end. Indeed, we daily see this and experience it. How much trouble there is now in the world only on account of bad coins, daily oppression, raising of prices in common trade, and bargaining and labor by those who greedily oppress the poor and deprive them of their daily bread! This we must suffer indeed. But let such people take care so that they do not lose the benefits of common intercession. Let them beware lest this petition in the Lord’s Prayer speak against them.
—Large Catechism III 80–84

## Hymnody

To this temple, where we call You,
   Come, O Lord of hosts, and stay;
Come with all Your loving-kindness,
   Hear Your people as they pray;
And Your fullest benediction
   Shed within these walls today.
—Christ Is Made the Sure Foundation (LSB 909:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, whose glory it is always to have mercy, be gracious to all who have gone astray from Your ways and bring them again with penitent hearts and steadfast faith to embrace and hold fast the unchangeable truth of Your Word; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L25)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles II IV 1–9

[1] The pope is not, according to divine law or God’s Word, the head of all Christendom. This name belongs to One only, whose name is Jesus Christ [Colossians 1:18]. The pope is only the bishop and pastor of the Church at Rome and of those who have attached themselves to him voluntarily or through a human agency (such as a political ruler). Christians are not under him as a lord. They are with him as brethren and companions, as the ancient councils and the age of St. Cyprian show.

[2] Today, though, none of the bishops dare to address the pope as “brother” as was done in the time ‹of Cyprian›. Even kings or emperors have to call him “most gracious lord.” We will not, cannot, and must not approve this arrogance with a good conscience. Whoever wants to, can do it without us.

[3] It follows that all the pope has done and undertaken from such false, mischievous, blasphemous, and arrogant power are devilish affairs and transactions. (With the exception of what relates to the secular government, where God often allows much good to be done for a people, even through a tyrant and scoundrel.) The pope does this all for the ruin of the entire holy Christian Church (so far as it is in his power) and for the destruction of the chief article about the redemption made through Jesus Christ.

[4] For there stand all the pope’s bulls and books. He roars like a lion in them (as the angel in Revelation 12 depicts him), crying out that no Christian can be saved without obeying him and being subject to him in all that he wishes, says, and does. All of this amounts to nothing less than this: Although you believe in Christ and have in Him alone everything you need for salvation, yet it is nothing and all in vain unless you regard me as your god, and be subject and obedient to me. It is clear that the holy Church has been without the pope for over five hundred years at least. To this day, the churches of the Greeks and of many other languages neither have been nor are presently under the pope.

[5] Besides, as is often remarked, the papacy is a human invention that is not commanded and is not necessary but useless. The holy Christian Church can exist very well without such a head. It would certainly have remained purer if such a head had not been raised up by the devil.

[6] The papacy is also of no use in the Church, because it exercises no Christian office. Therefore, it is necessary for the Church to continue and to exist without the pope.

[7] Suppose that the pope would yield this point. He would not be supreme by divine right or from God’s command, but just because we need a head, to whom all the rest cling in order to preserve the unity of Christians against sects and heretics. Suppose that such a head were chosen, and that people had the choice and the power to change or remove this head. (The Council of Constance nearly adopted this course with reference to the popes, deposing three and electing a fourth.) Suppose, I say, that the pope and See at Rome would yield and accept this (though this is impossible, for then he would have to let his entire realm and estate be overthrown and destroyed, with all his rights and books, which, to put it briefly, he cannot do). Nevertheless, even if this were done, Christianity would not be helped, but many more sects would arise than before.

[8] People would have to be subject to this head, not from God’s command, but from their personal good pleasure. Such a head would easily and in a short time be despised, and finally not have any members. The head would not have to be forever confined to Rome or any other place. It might be wherever and in whatever church God would grant a man fit for the office. Oh, how complicated and confused that would be!

[9] The Church can never be better governed and preserved than if we all live under one head, Christ. All the bishops should be equal in office (although they may be unequal in gifts). They should be diligently joined in unity of doctrine, faith, sacraments, prayer, works of love, and such. According to St. Jerome, this is how the priests at Alexandria governed the churches, together and in common. So did the apostles and, afterward, all bishops throughout all Christendom, until the pope raised his head above all.
