# February 7

## Psalmody

1 Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness! You have given me relief when I was | in distress.* Be gracious to me and | hear my prayer!
2 O men, how long shall my honor be turned | into shame?* How long will you love vain words and seek | after lies?
3 But know that the LORD has set apart the godly | for himself;* the LORD hears when I | call to him.
4 Be angry, and | do not sin;* ponder in your own hearts on your beds, and be | silent.
5 Offer right sacri- | fices,* and put your trust | in the LORD.
6 There are many who say, Who will show | us some good?* Lift up the light of your face upon us, | O LORD!”
7 You have put more joy | in my heart* than they have when their grain and | wine abound.
8 In peace I will both lie | down and sleep;* for you alone, O LORD, make me dwell in | safety.
—Psalm 4
Additional Psalm: Psalm 18

## Old Testament Reading: Job 4:1–21

Eliphaz Speaks: The Innocent Prosper 1Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said: 2“If one ventures a word with you, will you be impatient?

Yet who can keep from speaking?

3Behold, you have instructed many, and you have strengthened the weak hands. 4Your words have upheld him who was stumbling, and you have made firm the feeble knees. 5But now it has come to you, and you are impatient; it touches you, and you are dismayed. 6Is not your fear of God your confidence, and the integrity of your ways your hope? 7“Remember: who that was innocent ever perished? Or where were the upright cut off? 8As I have seen, those who plow iniquity and sow trouble reap the same. 9By the breath of God they perish, and by the blast of his anger they are consumed. 10The roar of the lion, the voice of the fierce lion, the teeth of the young lions are broken. 11The strong lion perishes for lack of prey, and the cubs of the lioness are scattered. 12“Now a word was brought to me stealthily; my ear received the whisper of it. 13Amid thoughts from visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men, 14dread came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones shake. 15A spirit glided past my face; the hair of my flesh stood up. 16It stood still, but I could not discern its appearance. A form was before my eyes; there was silence, then I heard a voice: 17‘Can mortal man be in the right before God? Can a man be pure before his Maker? 18Even in his servants he puts no trust, and his angels he charges with error; 19how much more those who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed like the moth. 20Between morning and evening they are beaten to pieces; they perish forever without anyone regarding it. 21Is not their tent-cord plucked up within them, do they not die, and that without wisdom?’”

## New Testament Reading: John 2:1–12

The Wedding at Cana

1On the third day there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there. 2Jesus also was invited to the wedding with his disciples. 3When the wine ran out, the mother of Jesus said to him, “They have no wine.” 4And Jesus said to her, “Woman, what does this have to do with me? My hour has not yet come.” 5His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever he tells you.” 6Now there were six stone water jars there for the Jewish rites of purification, each holding twenty or thirty gallons. 7Jesus said to the servants, “Fill the jars with water.” And they filled them up to the brim. 8And he said to them, “Now draw some out and take it to the master of the feast.” So they took it. 9When the master of the feast tasted the water now become wine, and did not know where it came from (though the servants who had drawn the water knew), the master of the feast called the bridegroom 10and said to him, “Everyone serves the good wine first, and when people have drunk freely, then the poor wine. But you have kept the good wine until now.” 11This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee, and manifested his glory. And his disciples believed in him. 12After this he went down to Capernaum, with his mother and his brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there for a few days.

## Writing

When Christ says of the bread, “This is My body, which is given for you,” they say, “This is not His body, which was given for you, but it is a reminder of His far-absent body.” We cannot allow the great treasure to be stolen from us which Christ bequeathed in His testament—His true body with which we were redeemed, and His precious blood with which we were washed from our sins—and put mere symbols in their place. Likewise, we cannot be convinced that it should be impossible for Christ our Lord, true God and man, to be present with His body and blood in the Supper and to distribute them, as the words of His testament read, without destroying His own body and, as our opponents say, being a liar. Likewise, we cannot concede that He with His assumed human body must be spatially present somewhere but cannot at the same time be in more than one place, though His words speak of this. For since He is almighty God and His assumed human nature is united to Him indivisibly and is also exalted to the right hand of the power of God, we have no doubt that He can do everything with His body that He wants and that He has promised to do with it in His Word.
—Timotheus Kirchner

## Hymnody

Lord, when You came as welcome guest
   To Cana’s wedding feast,
The bridal pair, divinely blest,
   Found all their joy increased.
—Lord, When You Came as Welcome Guest (LSB 859:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, You created man and woman and joined them together in holy marriage, thereby reflecting the mystical union between Christ and His bride, the Church. By Your infinite goodness, let Your blessing rest upon all husbands and wives, that they may live together in Your glory in this life and with joy may come to everlasting life; through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (530)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles II II 25–29 and II III

[25] The invocation of saints is also one of the Antichrist’s abuses that conflicts with the chief article and destroys the knowledge of Christ [Philippians 3:8]. It is neither commanded nor counseled, nor has it any warrant in Scripture. Even if it were a precious thing—which it is not—we have everything a thousand times better in Christ.

[26] The angels in heaven pray for us, as does Christ Himself [Romans 8:34]. So do the saints on earth and perhaps also in heaven [Revelation 6:9–10]. It does not follow, though, that we should invoke and adore the angels and saints [Revelation 22:8–9]. Nor should we fast, hold festivals, celebrate Mass, make offerings, and establish churches, altars, and divine worship in their honor. Nor should we serve them in other ways or regard them as helpers in times of need. Nor should we divide different kinds of help among them, ascribing to each one a particular form of assistance, as the papists teach and do. This is idolatry. Such honor belongs to God alone.

[27] As a Christian and saint upon earth, you can pray for me in many necessities. But this does not mean that I have to adore and call upon you. I do not need to celebrate festivals, fast, make sacrifices, or hold Masses for your honor. I do not have to put my faith in you for my salvation. I can honor, love, and thank you in Christ in other ways.

[28] If such idolatrous honor were withdrawn from angels and departed saints, the remaining honor would be harmless and quickly forgotten. When advantage and assistance (both bodily and spiritual) are no longer expected, the saints will not be troubled, neither in their graves nor in heaven. No one will much remember or esteem or honor them without a reward or just out of pure love.

[29] In short, we cannot tolerate the Mass or anything that proceeds from it or is attached to it. We have to condemn the Mass in order to keep the holy Sacrament pure and certain, according to Christ’s institution, used and received through faith.

## ARTICLE III

## Chapters and Cloisters

[1] Monastic chapters and cloisters were formerly founded with the good intention of educating learned men and virtuous women. They should be used for that again. They could produce pastors, preachers, and other ministers for the churches. They could also produce essential personnel for the secular government in cities and countries, as well as well-educated young women for mothers, housekeepers, and such.

[2] If these institutions will not serve this purpose, it is better to abandon them or tear them down than have their blasphemous, humanly invented services regarded as something better than the ordinary Christian life and the offices and callings ordained by God. This too is contrary to the chief article on the redemption through Jesus Christ. Like all other human inventions, these religious institutions have not been commanded. They are needless and useless. They are also occasions for dangerous ‹annoyances› and empty works [Isaiah 29:20], what the Hebrew prophets call Aven (i.e., pain and labor).
