# February 13

## Psalmody

1 Oh come, let us sing | to the LORD;* let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our sal- | vation!
2 Let us come into his presence with thanks- | giving;* let us make a joyful noise to him with | songs of praise!
3 For the LORD is a | great God,* and a great King a- | bove all gods.
4 In his hand are the depths | of the earth;* the heights of the mountains are his | also.
5 The sea is his, for he | made it,* and his hands formed the | dry land.
6 Oh come, let us worship and | bow down;* let us kneel before the LORD, our | Maker!
7 For he | is our God,* and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep | of his hand.
—Psalm 95:1–7a
Additional Psalm: Psalm 70

## Old Testament Reading: Job 9:1–35

Job Replies: There Is No Arbiter 1Then Job answered and said: 2“Truly I know that it is so: But how can a man be in the right before God? 3If one wished to contend with him, one could not answer him once in a thousand times. 4He is wise in heart and mighty in strength—who has hardened himself against him, and succeeded?—5he who removes mountains, and they know it not, when he overturns them in his anger, 6who shakes the earth out of its place, and its pillars tremble; 7who commands the sun, and it does not rise; who seals up the stars; 8who alone stretched out the heavens and trampled the waves of the sea; 9who made the Bear and Orion, the Pleiades and the chambers of the south; 10who does great things beyond searching out, and marvelous things beyond number. 11Behold, he passes by me, and I see him not; he moves on, but I do not perceive him. 12Behold, he snatches away; who can turn him back? Who will say to him, ‘What are you doing?’ 13“God will not turn back his anger; beneath him bowed the helpers of Rahab. 14How then can I answer him, choosing my words with him? 15Though I am in the right, I cannot answer him; I must appeal for mercy to my accuser. 16If I summoned him and he answered me, I would not believe that he was listening to my voice. 17For he crushes me with a tempest and multiplies my wounds without cause; 18he will not let me get my breath, but fills me with bitterness. 19If it is a contest of strength, behold, he is mighty! If it is a matter of justice, who can summon him? 20Though I am in the right, my own mouth would condemn me; though I am blameless, he would prove me perverse. 21I am blameless; I regard not myself; I loathe my life. 22It is all one; therefore I say, He destroys both the blameless and the wicked. 23When disaster brings sudden death, he mocks at the calamity of the innocent. 24The earth is given into the hand of the wicked; he covers the faces of its judges—if it is not he, who then is it? 25“My days are swifter than a runner; they flee away; they see no good. 26They go by like skiffs of reed, like an eagle swooping on the prey. 27If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint, I will put off my sad face, and be of good cheer,’ 28I become afraid of all my suffering, for I know you will not hold me innocent. 29I shall be condemned; why then do I labor in vain? 30If I wash myself with snow and cleanse my hands with lye, 31yet you will plunge me into a pit, and my own clothes will abhor me. 32For he is not a man, as I am, that I might answer him, that we should come to trial together. 33There is no arbiter between us, who might lay his hand on us both. 34Let him take his rod away from me, and let not dread of him terrify me. 35Then I would speak without fear of him, for I am not so in myself.”

## New Testament Reading: John 4:46–54

Jesus Heals an Official’s Son

46So he came again to Cana in Galilee, where he had made the water wine. And at Capernaum there was an official whose son was ill. 47When this man heard that Jesus had come from Judea to Galilee, he went to him and asked him to come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death. 48So Jesus said to him, “Unless you see signs and wonders you will not believe.” 49The official said to him, “Sir, come down before my child dies.” 50Jesus said to him, “Go; your son will live.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him and went on his way. 51As he was going down, his servants met him and told him that his son was recovering. 52So he asked them the hour when he began to get better, and they said to him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.” 53The father knew that was the hour when Jesus had said to him, “Your son will live.” And he himself believed, and all his household. 54This was now the second sign that Jesus did when he had come from Judea to Galilee.

## Writing

“In the Epistle to the Ephesians [St. Paul] gives a charge on this subject of work, saying: “He that stole, let him now steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have something to give to him who suffers need.” And in the Acts of the Apostles, too, we find that he not only taught this but also actually practiced it himself. For when he had come to Corinth, he did not permit himself to lodge anywhere except with Aquila and Priscilla, because they were of the same trade that he himself was accustomed to practice. For we read: “After this, Paul departing from Athens came to Corinth; and finding a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, and Priscilla his wife, he came to them because they were of the same trade; and abode with them, and worked: for they were tentmakers by trade.” Then going to Miletus, and from thence sending to Ephesus and summoning to him the elders of the church of Ephesus, he charged them how they ought to rule the church of God in his absence, and said: “I have not coveted any man’s silver and gold; you yourselves know how for such things as were needful for me and them that are with me these hands have ministered. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring you ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said: It is more blessed to give than to receive.”
—John Cassian

## Hymnody

Now hell, its prince, the devil,
   Of all their pow’r are shorn;
Now I am safe from evil,
   And sin I laugh to scorn.
Grim death with all its might
Cannot my soul affright;
   It is a pow’rless form,
   Howe’er it rave and storm.
—Awake, My Heart, with Gladness (LSB 467:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Triune God, whose very name is holy, teach us to be faithful hearers and learners of Your Word, fervent in the Spirit as Apollos was, that we may teach it correctly against those who have been led astray into falsehood and error and that we might follow the example of Aquila and Priscilla for the good of the Church You established here and entrusted into our humble care; for You, O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, live and reign, one God, now and forever. (1144) Aquila, Priscilla, Apollos Aquila and his wife, Priscilla (Prisca), Jewish contemporaries of St. Paul, traveled widely. Because of persecution in Rome, they went to Corinth where they met the apostle Paul, who joined them in their trade of tentmaking (Acts 18:1–3). In turn, they joined Paul in his mission of proclaiming the Christian Gospel. The couple later traveled with Paul from Corinth to Ephesus (Acts 18:18), where the two of them established a home that served as hospitality headquarters for new converts to Christianity. Apollos was one of their numerous Jewish pupils in the faith. An eloquent man, Apollos, “being fervent in spirit … spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus” (Acts 18:25). He later traveled from Corinth to the province of Achaia, “showing by the Scriptures that the Christ was Jesus” (Acts 18:28). Aquila, Priscilla, and Apollos are all remembered and honored for their great missionary zeal.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles III III 20–28

[20] Here, too, there was neither faith nor Christ. The power of the Absolution was not declared to him. Rather, his consolation depended upon his listing of sins and his self-abasement. What torture, fraud, and idolatry this kind of confession has produced is more than can be said.

[21] As for satisfaction, this is by far the most complex part of all. For no one can know how much to render for a single sin, let alone how much for all. They resorted to the device of imposing a small satisfaction, which could indeed be rendered, as five “Our Fathers,” a day’s fast, or such. Then, for the rest of their repentance, they were directed to purgatory.

[22] Here, too, there was nothing but anguish and misery. Some thought they would never get out of purgatory. According to the old Church laws, seven years’ penance in purgatory is required for a single mortal sin.

[23] Yet, confidence was placed in our work of satisfaction. If the satisfaction could be perfect, confidence would be placed in it entirely. Neither faith nor Christ would be necessary. But such confidence was impossible. For even though someone had done penance that way for a hundred years, he would still not know whether he had finished his penance. That meant doing penance forever and never coming to repentance.

[24] Then the Holy See at Rome, coming to the aid of the poor Church, invented indulgences. With these, it forgave and remitted satisfaction. First, for a single sin, an indulgence could cancel seven years in purgatory. Or an indulgence could cancel a hundred years. They distributed them among the cardinals and bishops, so that one could grant indulgence for a hundred years and another for a hundred days. But the pope reserved to himself alone the power to cancel the entire satisfaction.

[25] Since indulgences began to yield money and as the traffic in bulls became profitable, the pope devised the golden jubilee year‹—a truly gold-bearing year—› and established it at Rome [compare to Leviticus 25]. He said this would give the cancellation of all punishment and guilt. The people came running, because everyone would gladly be freed from this grievous, unbearable burden. This was meant to find and raise the treasures of the earth. Immediately, the pope pressed still further and multiplied the golden years one after another. The more he devoured money, the bigger his appetite grew.

Later, by his representatives to the countries, the pope issued ‹his golden years› everywhere, until all churches and houses were full of the golden year.

[26] Ultimately, he made an inroad into purgatory, among the dead. First, he founded Masses and vigils, and, afterward, indulgences and the golden year. Finally, souls became so cheap that he released one for a penny.

[27] But all this, too, did nothing. Even though the pope taught people to depend on and trust these indulgences for salvation, he made the matter uncertain again. In his bulls he declares that whoever wants to share in the indulgences or a golden year has to be contrite and have confessed and pay money. We have already seen how, with the papacy, contrition and confession are uncertain and hypocritical. Besides, no one knew what soul was in purgatory. If some souls were in purgatory, no one knew who had properly repented and confessed. So the pope took the precious money, comforting people with his power and indulgence. But then he directed them again to their uncertain works.

[28] Now some did not believe themselves guilty of actual sins in thought, word, and deeds. I, and people like me in monasteries and religious communities, wanted to be monks and priests. We fought against evil thoughts by doing such things as fasting, staying awake, praying, saying Mass, wearing coarse garments, and sleeping on hard beds. In total sincerity and with great effort, we wanted to be holy. Yet the hereditary, inborn evil sometimes came out in sleep, as happens (St. Augustine and St. Jerome, among others, also confess this). Still, each one held the other in high esteem. According to our teaching, some monks were regarded as holy, without sin, and full of good works. Also, since we had more good works than we needed to get to heaven, we could communicate and sell our good works to others. This is actually true. Seals, letters, and examples are at hand ‹to prove that this happened›.
