# February 18

## Psalmody

1 Oh give thanks to the LORD; call up- | on his name;* make known his deeds among the | peoples!
23 Then Israel came to | Egypt;* Jacob sojourned in the | land of Ham.
37 Then he brought out Israel with sil- | ver and gold,* and there was none among his tribes who | stumbled.
38 Egypt was glad when they de- | parted,* for dread of them had fallen up- | on it.
39 He spread a cloud for a | covering,* and fire to give | light by night.
40 They asked, and he | brought quail,* and gave them bread from heaven in a- | bundance.
41 He opened the rock, and water | gushed out;* it flowed through the desert like a | river.
42 For he remembered his holy | promise,* and Abraham, his | servant.
43 So he brought his people | out with joy,* his chosen ones with | singing.
—Psalm 105:1, 23, 37–43
Additional Psalm: Psalm 105

## Old Testament Reading: Job 13:13–28

[Job Continues: Still I Will Hope in God] 13“Let me have silence, and I will speak, and let come on me what may. 14Why should I take my flesh in my teeth and put my life in my hand? 15Though he slay me, I will hope in him; yet I will argue my ways to his face. 16This will be my salvation, that the godless shall not come before him. 17Keep listening to my words, and let my declaration be in your ears. 18Behold, I have prepared my case; I know that I shall be in the right. 19Who is there who will contend with me? For then I would be silent and die. 20Only grant me two things, then I will not hide myself from your face: 21withdraw your hand far from me, and let not dread of you terrify me. 22Then call, and I will answer; or let me speak, and you reply to me. 23How many are my iniquities and my sins? Make me know my transgression and my sin. 24Why do you hide your face and count me as your enemy? 25Will you frighten a driven leaf and pursue dry chaff? 26For you write bitter things against me and make me inherit the iniquities of my youth. 27You put my feet in the stocks and watch all my paths; you set a limit for the soles of my feet. 28Man wastes away like a rotten thing, like a garment that is moth-eaten.”

## New Testament Reading: John 6:22–40

I Am the Bread of Life

22On the next day the crowd that remained on the other side of the sea saw that there had been only one boat there, and that Jesus had not entered the boat with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone. 23Other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks. 24So when the crowd saw that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats and went to Capernaum, seeking Jesus. 25When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you come here?” 26Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you are seeking me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate your fill of the loaves. 27Do not labor for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For on him God the Father has set his seal.” 28Then they said to him, “What must we do, to be doing the works of God?” 29Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.” 30So they said to him, “Then what sign do you do, that we may see and believe you? What work do you perform? 31Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness; as it is written, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’” 32Jesus then said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, it was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. 33For the bread of God is he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.” 34They said to him, “Sir, give us this bread always.” 35Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life; whoever comes to me shall not hunger, and whoever believes in me shall never thirst. 36But I said to you that you have seen me and yet do not believe. 37All that the Father gives me will come to me, and whoever comes to me I will never cast out. 38For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will but the will of him who sent me. 39And this is the will of him who sent me, that I should lose nothing of all that he has given me, but raise it up on the last day. 40For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who looks on the Son and believes in him should have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”

## Writing

Here you can see what it means to believe. It may indeed seem an easy matter, but it is in fact a high and great art. Therefore when you feel your sin, when your bad conscience smites you, or when persecution comes, then ask yourself whether you really believe. At such times one is wont to run to saints and helpers in cloisters and in the desert for succor and relief, crying: “O my dear man, intercede for me! O dear saint, help me! O let me live! I promise to become pious and to do many good works.” That is how a terrified conscience speaks. But tell me, where is faith? If you believe in the words of Christ, “None of them is lost whom Thou hast given Me” (John 17:12), then, as a Christian, you must say: “I acknowledge no saint here. I am a poor sinner deserving of death; but in defiance of sin and death I cling to Thee, and I will not let Thee go. I have taken hold of Thee, dear Lord Christ. Thou art my Life, and this is the Father’s will, that all who adhere to Thee have eternal life and be raised from the dead. In the meantime let my fate be what it will. I may be beheaded or burned at the stake.” No other life—whether it be called the monastic life or the life of St. Augustine or of St. John the Baptist—will arm a person for victory. Only faith in Christ can do so.
—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

Thy holy body into death was given,
Life to win for us in heaven.
No greater love than this to Thee could bind us;
May this feast thereof remind us!
   O Lord, have mercy!
Lord, Thy kindness did so constrain Thee
That Thy blood should bless and sustain me.
All our debt Thou hast paid;
Peace with God once more is made:
   O Lord, have mercy!
—O Lord, We Praise Thee (LSB 617:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, our refuge and our strength, You raised up Your servant Martin Luther to reform and renew Your Church in the light of Your living Word, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Defend and purify the Church in our own day, and grant that we may boldly proclaim Christ’s faithfulness unto death and His vindicating resurrection, which You made known to Your servant Martin through Jesus Christ, our Savior, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1148) Martin Luther, Doctor and Confessor Martin Luther, born on November 10, 1483, in Eisleben, Germany, initially began studies leading toward a degree in law. However, after a close encounter with death, he switched to the study of theology, entered an Augustinian monastery, was ordained a priest in 1505, and received a doctorate in theology in 1512. As a professor at the newly established University of Wittenberg, Luther’s scriptural studies led him to question many of the Church’s teachings and practices, especially the selling of indulgences. His refusal to back down from his convictions resulted in his excommunication in 1521. Following a period of seclusion at the Wart-burg castle, Luther returned to Wittenberg, where he spent the rest of his life preaching and teaching, translating the Scriptures, and writing hymns and numerous theological treatises. He is remembered and honored for his lifelong emphasis on the biblical truth that for Christ’s sake God declares us righteous by grace through faith alone. Luther died on February 18, 1546, while visiting the town of his birth.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles III XIV–XV

## ARTICLE XIV

## Monastic Vows

[1] Since monastic vows directly conflict with the first chief article, they must be absolutely abolished. It is about them that Christ says, “Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will lead many astray” (Matthew 24:5, 23–24).

[2] He who makes a vow to live as a monk believes that he will enter upon a way of life holier than ordinary Christians lead. He wants to earn heaven by his own works, not only for himself, but also for others.

[3] This is to deny Christ. They also boast from their St. Thomas Aquinas that a monastic vow is equal to Baptism. This is blasphemy.

## ARTICLE XV

## Human Traditions

[1] The declaration of the papists that human traditions serve for the forgiveness of sins or merit salvation is unchristian and condemned. As Christ says, “In vain do they worship Me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men” [Matthew 15:9]. Again, “the commands of people who turn away from the truth” [Titus 1:14].

[2] When they declare that it is a mortal sin if someone breaks these ordinances, this, too, is not right.

[3] These are the articles on which I must stand, and, God willing, shall stand, even to my death. I do not know how to change or yield anything in them. If anyone wants to yield anything, let him do it at the peril of his conscience.

[4] Finally, there still remains the pope’s bag of tricks about foolish and childish articles, such as the dedication of churches, the baptism of bells, the baptism of the altar stone, and the inviting of sponsors to these rites who would make donations towards them. Such baptizing is a mockery and scorning of Holy Baptism, and so should not be tolerated.

[5] Furthermore, concerning the consecration of wax candles, palm branches, cakes, oats, spices, and such, these cannot be called consecrations, but are sheer mockery and fraud. Such tricks are without number. We commend them for adoration to their god and to themselves, until they weary of it. We will have nothing to do with them.

[1] Doctor Martin Luther subscribed.

[2] Doctor Justus Jonas, Rector, subscribed with his own hand.

[3] Doctor John Bugenhagen, Pomeranus, subscribed.

[4] Doctor Caspar Creutziger subscribed.

[5] Nicholas Amsdorf of Magdeburg subscribed.

[6] George Spalatin of Altenburg subscribed.

[7] I, Philip Melanchthon, also approve the above articles as right and Christian. But regarding the pope, I hold that, if he would allow the Gospel, we could agree to his superiority over the bishops, which he has otherwise by human right. This would be for the sake of peace and the general unity of those Christians who are also under him and may be under him hereafter.

[8] John Agricola of Eisleben subscribed.

[9] Gabriel Didymus [Zwilling] subscribed.

[10] I, Doctor Urban Rhegius, Superintendent of the churches in the Duchy of Lüneburg, subscribe in my own name and in the name of my brothers, and of the Church of Hanover.

[11] I, Stephen Agricola, Minister at Hof, subscribe.

[12] Also I, John Draconites, Professor and Minister at Marburg, subscribe.

[13] I, Conrad Figenbotz, for the glory of God, subscribe that I have thus believed, and am still preaching and firmly believing.

[14] I, Andreas Osiander of Nürnberg, subscribe.

[15] I, Magister Veit Dietrich, Minister at Nürnberg, subscribe.

[16] I, Erhard Schnepf, Preacher at Stuttgart, subscribe.

[17] Conrad Ötinger, Preacher of Duke Ulrich at Pforzheim.

[18] Simon Schneeweiss, Pastor of the Church at Crailsheim.

[19] I, John Schlaginhaufen, Pastor of the Church at Köthen, subscribe.

[20] The Reverend Magister George Helt of Forchheim.

[21] The Reverend Magister Adam [Krafft] of Fulda, Preacher in Hesse.

[22] The Reverend Magister Anthony Corvinus, Preacher in Hesse.

[23] I, Doctor John Bugenhagen, Pomeranus, again subscribe in the name of Schoolmaster John Brentz, as on departing from Smalcald he directed me orally and by a letter, which I have shown to those brothers who have subscribed.

[24] I, Dionysius Melander, subscribe to the Confession, the Apology, and the Concordia on the subject of the Eucharist.

[25] Paul Rhodius, Superintendent of Stettin.

[26] Gerhard Öniken, Superintendent of the Church at Minden.

[27] I, Brixius Northanus, Minister of the Church of Christ which is at Söst, subscribe to the Articles of the Reverend Father Martin Luther, and confess that up till now I have believed and taught this way, and by the Spirit of Christ I will continue thus to believe and teach.

[28] Michael Cölius, Preacher at Mansfeld, subscribed.

[29] The Reverend Magister Peter Geltner, Preacher at Frankfurt, subscribed.

[30] Wendel Faber, Pastor of Seeburg in Mansfeld.

[31] I, John Aepinus, subscribe.

[32] Likewise, I, John [Tieman from] Amsterdam of Bremen.

[33] I, Frederick Myconius, Pastor of the Church at Gotha in Thuringia, subscribe in my own name and in that of Justus Menius of Eisenach.

[34] I, Doctor John Lang, Preacher of the Church at Erfurt, subscribe with my own hand in my own name, and in that of my other co-workers in the Gospel, namely:

[35] The Reverend Licentiate Ludwig Platz of Melsungen.

[36] The Reverend Schoolmaster Sigismund Kirchner.

[37] The Reverend Wolfgang Kiswetter.

[38] The Reverend Melchior Weitmann.

[39] The Reverend John Tall.

[40] The Reverend John Kilian.

[41] The Reverend Nicholas Faber.

[42] The Reverend Andrew Menser.

[43] And I, Egidius Melcher, have subscribed with my own hand.
