# February 17

## Psalmody

25 I have been young, and | now am old,* yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken or his children beg- | ging for bread.
26 He is ever lending | generously,* and his children become a | blessing.
27 Turn away from evil | and do good;* so shall you dwell for- | ever.
28 For the LORD loves justice; he will not forsake his saints. They are preserved for- | ever,* but the children of the wicked shall | be cut off.
29 The righteous shall inher- | it the land* and dwell upon it for- | ever.
—Psalm 37:25–29
Additional Psalm: Psalm 77

## Old Testament Reading: Job 13:1–12

Job Continues: Still I Will Hope in God 1“Behold, my eye has seen all this, my ear has heard and understood it. 2What you know, I also know; I am not inferior to you. 3But I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to argue my case with God. 4As for you, you whitewash with lies; worthless physicians are you all. 5Oh that you would keep silent, and it would be your wisdom! 6Hear now my argument and listen to the pleadings of my lips. 7Will you speak falsely for God and speak deceitfully for him? 8Will you show partiality toward him? Will you plead the case for God? 9Will it be well with you when he searches you out? Or can you deceive him, as one deceives a man? 10He will surely rebuke you if in secret you show partiality. 11Will not his majesty terrify you, and the dread of him fall upon you? 12Your maxims are proverbs of ashes; your defenses are defenses of clay.”

## New Testament Reading: John 6:1–21

Jesus Feeds the Five Thousand

1After this Jesus went away to the other side of the Sea of Galilee, which is the Sea of Tiberias. 2And a large crowd was following him, because they saw the signs that he was doing on the sick. 3Jesus went up on the mountain, and there he sat down with his disciples. 4Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand. 5Lifting up his eyes, then, and seeing that a large crowd was coming toward him, Jesus said to Philip, “Where are we to buy bread, so that these people may eat?” 6He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he would do. 7Philip answered him, “Two hundred denarii would not buy enough bread for each of them to get a little.” 8One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him, 9“There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are they for so many?” 10Jesus said, “Have the people sit down.” Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, about five thousand in number. 11Jesus then took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed them to those who were seated. So also the fish, as much as they wanted. 12And when they had eaten their fill, he told his disciples, “Gather up the leftover fragments, that nothing may be lost.” 13So they gathered them up and filled twelve baskets with fragments from the five barley loaves left by those who had eaten. 14When the people saw the sign that he had done, they said, “This is indeed the Prophet who is to come into the world!” 15Perceiving then that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, Jesus withdrew again to the mountain by himself.

Jesus Walks on Water

16When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, 17got into a boat, and started across the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them. 18The sea became rough because a strong wind was blowing. 19When they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat, and they were frightened. 20But he said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.” 21Then they were glad to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat was at the land to which they were going.

## Writing

VII: The Church Our churches teach that one holy Church is to remain forever. The Church is the congregation of saints [Psalm 149:1] in which the Gospel is purely taught and the Sacraments are correctly administered. For the true unity of the Church it is enough to agree about the doctrine of the Gospel and the administration of the Sacraments. It is not necessary that human traditions, that is, rites or ceremonies instituted by men, should be the same everywhere. As Paul says, “One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all” (Ephesians 4:5–6). VIII: What the Church Is Strictly speaking, the Church is the congregation of saints and true believers. However, because many hypocrites and evil persons are mingled within them in this life [Matthew 13:24–30], it is lawful to use Sacraments administered by evil men, according to the saying of Christ, “The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses’ seat” (Matthew 23:2). Both the Sacraments and Word are effective because of Christ’s institution and command, even if they are administered by evil men. Our churches condemn the Donatists, and others like them, who deny that it is lawful to use the ministry of evil men in the Church, and who think that the ministry of evil men is not useful and is ineffective. IX: Baptism Concerning Baptism, our churches teach that Baptism is necessary for salvation [Mark 16:16] and that God’s grace is offered through Baptism [Titus 3:4–7]. They teach that children are to be baptized [Acts 2:38–39]. Being offered to God through Baptism, they are received into God’s grace. Our churches condemn the Anabaptists, who reject the Baptism of children, and say that children are saved without Baptism. X: The Lord’s Supper Our churches teach that the body and blood of Christ are truly present and distributed to those who eat the Lord’s Supper [1 Corinthians 10:16]. They reject those who teach otherwise. XI: Confession Our churches teach that private Absolu-tion should be retained in the churches, although listing all sins is not necessary for Confession. For, according to the Psalm, it is impossible. “Who can discern his errors?” (Psalm 19:12).
—Augsburg Confession VII–XI

## Hymnody

To pastures green, Lord, safely guide,
   To restful waters lead me;
Your table well for me provide,
   Your wounded hand now feed me.
Though weary, sinful, sick, and weak,
Refuge in You alone I seek,
   To share Your cup of healing.
—Lord Jesus Christ, Life-Giving Bread (LSB 625:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful Father, You gave Your Son Jesus as the heavenly bread of life. Grant us faith to feast on Him in Your Word and Sacraments that we may be nourished unto life everlasting; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (B71)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles III IX–XIII
