# February 15

## Psalmody

1 Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me, for in you my soul takes | refuge;* in the shadow of your wings I will take refuge, till the storms of destruction | pass by.
2 I cry out to | God Most High,* to God who fulfills his pur- | pose for me.
3 He will send from heaven and save me; he will put to shame him who tramples | on me.* God will send out his steadfast love and his | faithfulness!
4 My soul is in the midst of lions; I lie down amid | fiery beasts—* the children of man, whose teeth are spears and arrows, whose tongues are | sharp swords.
5 Be exalted, O God, above the | heavens!* Let your glory be over | all the earth!
8 Awake, my glory! Awake, O | harp and lyre!* I will a- | wake the dawn!
9 I will give thanks to you, O Lord, among the | peoples;* I will sing praises to you among the | nations.
10 For your steadfast love is great to the | heavens,* your faithfulness | to the clouds.
—Psalm 57:1–5, 8–10
Additional Psalm: Psalm 1

## Old Testament Reading: Job 11:1–20

Zophar Speaks: You Deserve Worse 1Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said: 2“Should a multitude of words go unanswered, and a man full of talk be judged right? 3Should your babble silence men, and when you mock, shall no one shame you? 4For you say, ‘My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in God’s eyes.’ 5But oh, that God would speak and open his lips to you, 6and that he would tell you the secrets of wisdom! For he is manifold in understanding. Know then that God exacts of you less than your guilt deserves. 7“Can you find out the deep things of God? Can you find out the limit of the Almighty? 8It is higher than heaven—what can you do? Deeper than

Sheol—what can you know?

9Its measure is longer than the earth and broader than the sea. 10If he passes through and imprisons and summons the court, who can turn him back? 11For he knows worthless men; when he sees iniquity, will he not consider it? 12But a stupid man will get understanding when a wild donkey’s colt is born a man! 13“If you prepare your heart, you will stretch out your hands toward him. 14If iniquity is in your hand, put it far away, and let not injustice dwell in your tents. 15Surely then you will lift up your face without blemish; you will be secure and will not fear. 16You will forget your misery; you will remember it as waters that have passed away. 17And your life will be brighter than the noonday; its darkness will be like the morning. 18And you will feel secure, because there is hope; you will look around and take your rest in security. 19You will lie down, and none will make you afraid; many will court your favor. 20But the eyes of the wicked will fail; all way of escape will be lost to them, and their hope is to breathe their last.”

## New Testament Reading: John 5:19–29

The Authority of the Son

19So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of his own accord, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever the Father does, that the Son does likewise. 20For the Father loves the Son and shows him all that he himself is doing. And greater works than these will he show him, so that you may marvel. 21For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whom he will. 22The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son, 23that all may honor the Son, just as they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him. 24Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life. He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life. 25“Truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming, and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live. 26For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself. 27And he has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man. 28Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice 29and come out, those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment.”

## Writing

My son: First, study the divine Scriptures. Study them I say. For we need to study the divine writings deeply in order to prevent ourselves from speaking faster than we think. And while you study these divine works, with a believing and God-pleasing intention, knock at that which is closed in them, and it shall be opened to you by the doorkeeper, of whom Jesus says, “To him the doorkeeper opens.” While you attend to this divine reading, seek aright and with unwavering faith in God the hidden sense which is present in most passages of the divine Scriptures. And do not be content with knocking and seeking, with mere knowledge. What is most necessary for understanding divine things is prayer. In urging us to this the Savior says not only, “Knock, and it shall be opened to you” and “Seek, and you shall find,” but also, “Ask, and it shall be given you.” So much I have ventured on account of my fatherly love to you. Whether I have ventured well in this or not, God knows, and His Christ. May you now partake in these things and have an ever increasing share of them, so that you may be able to say not only, “We are partakers of Christ,” but also, “We are partakers of God.”
—Origen

## Hymnody

All trials and all griefs are past,
A blessèd end has come at last.
Christ’s yoke was borne with ready will;
Who dieth thus is living still.
—This Body in the Grave We Lay (LSB 759:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, You sent Onesimus back to Philemon as a brother in Christ, freeing him from his slavery to sin through the preaching of the apostle Paul. Cleanse the depths of sin within our souls and bid resentment cease for past offenses, that, by Your mercy, we may be reconciled to our brothers and sisters and our lives will reflect Your peace; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1146) Philemon and Onesimus Philemon was a prominent first-century Christian who owned a slave named Onesimus. Although the name Onesimus means “useful,” Onesimus proved himself “useless” when he ran away from his master and perhaps even stole from him (Philemon 18). Somehow Onesimus came into contact with the apostle Paul while the latter was in prison (possibly in Rome), and through Paul’s proclamation of the Gospel, he became a Christian. After confessing to the apostle that he was a runaway slave, Onesimus was directed by Paul to return to his master and become “useful” again. In order to help pave the way for Onesimus’s peaceful return home, Paul sent him on his way with a letter addressed to Philemon, a letter in which he urged Philemon to forgive his slave for running away and to “receive him as you would receive me” (v. 17), “no longer as a slave but … as a beloved brother” (v. 16). The letter was eventually included by the Church as one of the books of the New Testament.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles III IV–VII

## ARTICLE IV

## The Gospel

We will now return to the Gospel, which does not give us counsel and aid against sin in only one way. God is superabundantly generous in His grace: First, through the spoken Word, by which the forgiveness of sins is preached in the whole world [Luke 24:45–47]. This is the particular office of the Gospel. Second, through Baptism. Third, through the holy Sacrament of the Altar. Fourth, through the Power of the Keys. Also through the mutual conversation and consolation of brethren, “Where two or three are gathered” (Matthew 18:20) and other such verses [especially Romans 1:12].

## ARTICLE V

## Baptism

[1] Baptism is nothing other than God’s Word in the water, commanded by His institution. As Paul says, it is a “washing . . . with the word” [Ephesians 5:26]. As Augustine says, “When the Word is joined to the element or natural substance, it becomes a Sacrament.”

[2] This is why we do not agree with Thomas Aquinas and the monastic preachers who forget the Word (God’s institution). They say that God has imparted to the water a spiritual power, which through the water washes away sin.

[3] Nor do we agree with Scotus and the Barefooted Monks, who teach that Baptism washes away sins by the assistance of the divine will. They believe this washing occurs only through God’s will, and not at all through the Word or water.

[4] Of the Baptism of children, we hold that children should be baptized, for they belong to the promised redemption made through Christ [Acts 2:39]. Therefore, the Church should administer Baptism to them.

## ARTICLE VI

## The Sacrament of the Altar

[1] Of the Sacrament of the Altar, we hold that the bread and wine in the Supper are Christ’s true body and blood. These are given and received not only by the godly but also by wicked Christians [1 Corinthians 11:29–30].

[2] We do not hold that only one kind of the Sacrament is to be given (e.g., the bread alone). We do not need that “high reasoning” that teaches there is as much under the one kind as under both, as the sophists and the Council of Constance teach.

[3] Even if that were true, giving the one kind only is not the entire ordinance and institution commanded by Christ [Galatians 1:9].

[4] We especially condemn and in God’s name curse those who not only refuse to give both kinds but also quite tyrannically prohibit, condemn, and blaspheme giving both kinds as heresy. In doing so, they exalt themselves against and above Christ, our Lord and God.

[5] As for transubstantiation, we care nothing about the sophistic cunning by which they teach that bread and wine leave or lose their own natural substance so that only the appearance and color of bread remain, and not true bread. For it is in perfect agreement with Holy Scriptures that there is, and remains, bread, as Paul himself calls it, “The bread that we break” [1 Corinthians 10:16] and “Let a person . . . so eat of the bread” [1 Corinthians 11:28].

## ARTICLE VII

## The Keys

[1] The Keys are an office and power given by Christ to the Church for binding and loosing sin [Matthew 16:19]. This applies not only to gross and well-known sins, but also the subtle, hidden sins that are known only to God. As it is written, “Who can discern his errors?” (Psalm 19:12). And St. Paul himself complains that “with my flesh I serve the law of sin” (Romans 7:25).

[2] It is not in our power to judge which, how great, and how many the sins are. This belongs to God alone. As it is written, “Enter not into judgment with Your servant, for no one living is righteous before You” (Psalm 143:2).

[3] Paul says, “I am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not thereby acquitted” (1 Corinthians 4:4).
