# February 19

## Psalmody

1 The fool says in his heart, “There | is no God.”* They are corrupt, doing abominable iniquity; there is none | who does good.
2 God looks down from heaven on the chil- | dren of man* to see if there are any who understand, who seek | after God.
3 They have all fallen away; together they have be- | come corrupt;* there is none who does good, not | even one.
4 Have those who work evil no | knowledge,* who eat up my people as they eat bread, and do not call up- | on God?
5 There they are, in great terror, where there is no | terror!* For God scatters the bones of him who encamps against you; you put them to shame, for God has re- | jected them.
6 Oh, that salvation for Israel would come out of | Zion!* When God restores the fortunes of his people, let Jacob rejoice, let Israel | be glad.
—Psalm 53
Additional Psalm: Psalm 30

## Old Testament Reading: Job 14:1–22

Job Continues: Death Comes Soon to All 1“Man who is born of a woman is few of days and full of trouble. 2He comes out like a flower and withers; he flees like a shadow and continues not. 3And do you open your eyes on such a one and bring me into judgment with you? 4Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? There is not one. 5Since his days are determined, and the number of his months is with you, and you have appointed his limits that he cannot pass, 6look away from him and leave him alone, that he may enjoy, like a hired hand, his day. 7“For there is hope for a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that its shoots will not cease. 8Though its root grow old in the earth, and its stump die in the soil, 9yet at the scent of water it will bud and put out branches like a young plant. 10But a man dies and is laid low; man breathes his last, and where is he? 11As waters fail from a lake and a river wastes away and dries up, 12so a man lies down and rises not again; till the heavens are no more he will not awake or be roused out of his sleep. 13Oh that you would hide me in Sheol, that you would conceal me until your wrath be past, that you would appoint me a set time, and remember me! 14If a man dies, shall he live again? All the days of my service I would wait, till my renewal should come. 15You would call, and I would answer you; you would long for the work of your hands. 16For then you would number my steps; you would not keep watch over my sin; 17my transgression would be sealed up in a bag, and you would cover over my iniquity. 18“But the mountain falls and crumbles away, and the rock is removed from its place; 19the waters wear away the stones; the torrents wash away the soil of the earth; so you destroy the hope of man. 20You prevail forever against him, and he passes; you change his countenance, and send him away. 21His sons come to honor, and he does not know it; they are brought low, and he perceives it not. 22He feels only the pain of his own body, and he mourns only for himself.”

## New Testament Reading: John 6:41–59

[I Am the Bread of Life]

41So the Jews grumbled about him, because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.” 42They said, “Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How does he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?” 43Jesus answered them, “Do not grumble among yourselves. 44No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day. 45It is written in the Prophets, ‘And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has heard and learned from the Father comes to me—46not that anyone has seen the Father except he who is from God; he has seen the Father. 47Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes has eternal life. 48I am the bread of life. 49Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died. 50This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that one may eat of it and not die. 51I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And the bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.” 52The Jews then disputed among themselves, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” 53So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. 54Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day. 55For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink. 56Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him. 57As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so whoever feeds on me, he also will live because of me. 58This is the bread that came down from heaven, not like the bread the fathers ate and died. Whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.” 59Jesus said these things in the synagogue, as he taught at Capernaum.

## Writing

The divine and the human nature have this personal union with each other in the person of Christ and have the communion resulting from it (in deed and truth). For this reason, there is attributed to Christ (according to the flesh) what His flesh, according to its nature and essence, cannot be by itself. Apart from this union, His flesh cannot have these attributes: His flesh is a truly life-giving food and His blood a truly life-giving drink [John 6:55].… This man only, and no man besides, either in heaven or on earth, can say with truth, “Where two or three are gathered in My name, there am I among them” (Matthew 18:20). Also, “And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age” [Matthew 28:20].… We hold that by these words the majesty of the man Christ is declared. Christ has received this majesty, according to His humanity, at the right hand of God’s majesty and power. So also, according to His received human nature and with the same, He can be, and also is, present where He wants to be. He is present especially in His Church and congregation on earth as Mediator, Head, King, and High Priest. This presence is not a part, or only one half of Him. Christ’s entire person is present, to which both natures belong, the divine and the human—not only according to His divinity, but also according to, and with, His received human nature. He is our Brother [Hebrews 2:17], and we are flesh of His flesh and bone of His bone [Genesis 2:23]. He has instituted His Holy Supper for the certain assurance and confirmation of this, so that He will be with us, and dwell, work, and be effective in us also according to that nature from which He has flesh and blood.
—Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VIII 76, 78

## Hymnody

   Draw us to Thee,
   For then shall we
Walk in Thy steps forever
   And hasten on
   Where Thou art gone
To be with Thee, dear Savior.
—Draw Us to Thee (LSB 701:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Gracious Father, Your blessed Son came down from heaven to be the true bread that gives life to the world. Grant that Christ, the bread of life, may live in us and we in Him, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (B72)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord, Summary Content, Rule, and Norm

## THE SUMMARY CONTENT, RULE, AND NORM

## ACCORDING TO WHICH ALL TEACHINGS SHOULD BE JUDGED AND THE ERRONEOUS TEACHINGS THAT HAVE OCCURRED SHOULD BE DECIDED AND EXPLAINED IN A CHRISTIAN WAY

[1] 1. We believe, teach, and confess that the only rule and norm according to which all teachings, together with ‹all› teachers, should be evaluated and judged [2 Timothy 3:15–17] are the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testament alone. For it is written in Psalm 119:105, “Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.” St. Paul has written, “even if we or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be accursed” (Galatians 1:8).

[2] However, other writings by ancient or modern teachers—no matter whose name they bear—must not be regarded as equal to the Holy Scriptures. All of them are subject to the Scriptures [1 Corinthians 14:32]. Other writings should not be received in any other way or as anything more than witnesses that show how this ‹pure› doctrine of the prophets and apostles was preserved after the time of the apostles, and at what places.

[3] 2. Right after the time of the apostles, and even while they were still living, false teachers and heretics arose [Titus 3:9–10]. Therefore, symbols (i.e., brief, concise confessions) were written against the heretics in the Early Church. These symbols were regarded as the unanimous, universal Christian faith and confession of the orthodox and true Church. They are the Apostles’ Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Athanasian Creed. We pledge ourselves to these symbols, and in this way we reject all heresies and teachings that have been introduced into God’s Church against them.

[4] 3. However, schisms in matters of faith have also happened in our time. Therefore, we regard as the unanimous consensus and declaration of our Christian faith and confession—especially against the papacy and its false worship, idolatry, superstition, and against other sects—the first, unaltered Augsburg Confession. It is the symbol of our time, and it was delivered to the Emperor, Charles V, at Augsburg in the year 1530 in the great Diet. We hold to this confession along with its Apology and the Articles composed at Smalcald in the year 1537, which the chief theologians signed at that time.

[5] Such matters also concern the laity and the salvation of their souls. Therefore, we also confess Dr. Luther’s Small and Large Catechisms as they are included in Luther’s works. They are “the layman’s Bible” because everything necessary for a Christian to know for salvation is included in them, which is handled more extensively in the Holy Scriptures.

[6] As announced above, all teachings are to be conformed in this way. What is contrary to these confessions is to be rejected and condemned, as opposed to the unanimous declaration of our faith.

[7] In this way the distinction between the Holy Scriptures of the Old and of the New Testament and all other writings is preserved. The Holy Scriptures alone remain the judge, rule, and norm. According to them—as the only touchstone—all teachings shall and must be discerned and judged to see whether they are good or evil [1 Thessalonians 5:21–22], right or wrong.

[8] The other symbols and writings mentioned above are not judges like the Holy Scriptures. They are only a testimony and declaration of the faith. They show how the Holy Scriptures have been understood and explained in regard to controversial articles in God’s Church by those living at that time. Also, they show how the opposite teaching was rejected and condemned ‹by what arguments the dogmas conflicting with the Holy Scriptures were rejected and condemned›.
