# February 12

## Psalmody

1 In you, O LORD, do I take | refuge;* let me never be | put to shame!
2 In your righteousness deliver me and | rescue me;* incline your ear to me, and | save me!
3 Be to me a rock of refuge, to which I may contin- | ually come;* you have given the command to save me, for you are my rock and my | fortress.
4 Rescue me, O my God, from the hand of the | wicked,* from the grasp of the unjust and | cruel man.
5 For you, O Lord, | are my hope,* my trust, O LORD, | from my youth.
6 Upon you I have leaned from before my birth; you are he who took me from my | mother’s womb.* My praise is continually | of you.
17 O God, from my youth you have | taught me,* and I still proclaim your | wondrous deeds.
18 So even to old age and gray hairs, O God, do not for- | sake me,* until I proclaim your might to another generation, your power to all | those to come.
—Psalm 71:1–6, 17–18
Additional Psalm: Psalm 99

## Old Testament Reading: Job 8:1–22

Bildad Speaks: Job Should Repent 1Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said: 2“How long will you say these things, and the words of your mouth be a great wind? 3Does God pervert justice? Or does the Almighty pervert the right? 4If your children have sinned against him, he has delivered them into the hand of their transgression. 5If you will seek God and plead with the Almighty for mercy, 6if you are pure and upright, surely then he will rouse himself for you and restore your rightful habitation. 7And though your beginning was small, your latter days will be very great. 8“For inquire, please, of bygone ages, and consider what the fathers have searched out. 9For we are but of yesterday and know nothing, for our days on earth are a shadow. 10Will they not teach you and tell you and utter words out of their understanding? 11“Can papyrus grow where there is no marsh? Can reeds flourish where there is no water? 12While yet in flower and not cut down, they wither before any other plant. 13Such are the paths of all who forget God; the hope of the godless shall perish. 14His confidence is severed, and his trust is a spider’s web. 15He leans against his house, but it does not stand; he lays hold of it, but it does not endure. 16He is a lush plant before the sun, and his shoots spread over his garden. 17His roots entwine the stone heap; he looks upon a house of stones. 18If he is destroyed from his place, then it will deny him, saying, ‘I have never seen you.’ 19Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the soil others will spring. 20“Behold, God will not reject a blameless man, nor take the hand of evildoers. 21He will yet fill your mouth with laughter, and your lips with shouting. 22Those who hate you will be clothed with shame, and the tent of the wicked will be no more.”

## New Testament Reading: John 4:27–45

[Jesus and the Woman of Samaria]

27Just then his disciples came back. They marveled that he was talking with a woman, but no one said, “What do you seek?” or, “Why are you talking with her?” 28So the woman left her water jar and went away into town and said to the people, 29“Come, see a man who told me all that I ever did. Can this be the Christ?” 30They went out of the town and were coming to him. 31Meanwhile the disciples were urging him, saying, “Rabbi, eat.” 32But he said to them, “I have food to eat that you do not know about.” 33So the disciples said to one another, “Has anyone brought him something to eat?” 34Jesus said to them, “My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to accomplish his work. 35Do you not say, ‘There are yet four months, then comes the harvest’? Look, I tell you, lift up your eyes, and see that the fields are white for harvest. 36Already the one who reaps is receiving wages and gathering fruit for eternal life, so that sower and reaper may rejoice together. 37For here the saying holds true, ‘One sows and another reaps.’ 38I sent you to reap that for which you did not labor. Others have labored, and you have entered into their labor.” 39Many Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman’s testimony, “He told me all that I ever did.” 40So when the Samaritans came to him, they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days. 41And many more believed because of his word. 42They said to the woman, “It is no longer because of what you said that we believe, for we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Savior of the world.” 43After the two days he departed for Galilee. 44(For Jesus himself had testified that a prophet has no honor in his own hometown.) 45So when he came to Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him, having seen all that he had done in Jerusalem at the feast. For they too had gone to the feast.

## Writing

The woman had listened to Jesus with increasing understanding, not unmixed, however, with some measure of bewilderment over the depth of wisdom which lay in the words of Jesus. But the drift of the Lord’s speech seemed to be that the time of Mes-sianic glory was about to be revealed. Now the Samaritans had some dim and uncertain idea of the promised Messiah out of the Pen-tateuch. And the woman now voices her hope in this Messiah, who is called the Christ; with His coming, she knows, all type, symbol, and prophecy would be at an end, for He would bring them a full and complete message, clear and unmistakable to their understanding, without type and external worship. Jesus now revealed Himself to the woman in a few simple words: I am He, the man that is speaking with you. Jesus is the one Savior that can and will give to all men the full Gospel of salvation. He is the Savior of the world. There was no danger in this announcement of the Lord in Samaria, for, unlike the Jews, the Samaritans did not regard the promised Messiah as a king who was to inaugurate political changes, but as a prophet and teacher who would give them the full revelation of God’s Word and will. But the plain words of Jesus had taught the woman the true meaning of the Messiah, and she, the sinner, believed Him to be the Savior of sinners.
—Paul E. Kretzmann

## Hymnody

Open now the crystal fountain
    Whence the healing stream doth flow;
Let the fiery, cloudy pillar
    Lead me all my journey through.
Strong deliv’rer, strong deliv’rer,
    Be Thou still my strength and shield;
    Be Thou still my strength and shield.
—Guide Me, O Thou Great Redeemer (LSB 918:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus Christ, Savior of the world, help us ever to seek You and to seek others for You, that Your harvest may be full and we may join those from every tribe and nation at the heavenly feast, where You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1143)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles III III 10–19

[10] It was impossible for them to teach correctly about repentance, since they did not know what sin really is. As has been shown above, they do not believe correctly about original sin. Rather, they say that the natural powers of human beings have remained unimpaired and uncorrupted. They believe that reason can teach correctly, so that the will can do what is right, and God certainly bestows His grace when a person does as much as he can, according to his free will.

[11] According to that dogma, they need to do penance only for actual sins. Those would include only the evil thoughts that a person yields to. Or evil words and evil deeds that free will could easily have prevented. (According to these people, wicked emotions, lust, and improper attitudes are not sins.)

[12] They divide repentance into three parts: contrition, confession, and satisfaction. They add this consolation and promise: If a person truly repents, confesses, and renders satisfaction, he merits forgiveness. He has paid for his sins before God. So even in repentance, they taught people to put confidence in their own works.

[13] This is where the expression comes from that was used in the pulpit when Public Absolution was announced to the people: “Prolong, O God, my life, until I can make satisfaction for my sins and amend my life.”

[14] There was here no mention of Christ and faith. People hoped to overcome and blot out sins before God by their own works. With this intention, we became priests and monks, so we could protect ourselves against sin.

[15] As for contrition, this is how it was done. No one could remember all his sins (especially those committed over an entire year), so they inserted this provision: If an unknown sin is remembered later, it too has to be repented of and confessed, and so on. Until then, the person was commended to God’s grace.

[16] Furthermore, since no one could know how great the contrition ought to be in order to be enough before God, they gave this consolation: He who could not have contrition at least ought to have “attrition.” I call that half a contrition, or the beginning of contrition. The fact is, they themselves do not understand either of these terms, anymore than I do. But such attrition was counted as contrition when a person went to Confession.

[17] If anyone said that he could not have contrition or lament his sins (as might be the case with illicit love or the desire for revenge, etc.), they asked whether he wished or desired to have contrition. When one would reply “yes”—for who, save the devil himself, would say “no”?—they accepted this as contrition. They forgave him his sins on account of this good work of his. Here they cited the example of St. Bernard and others.

[18] Here one sees how blind reason gropes around in matters belonging to God [1 Corinthians 2:14]. According to its own imagination, reason seeks consolation in its own works and cannot remember Christ and faith. Viewed in the light, this contrition is a manufactured and fictitious thought. It comes from our own powers, without faith and without the knowledge of Christ. When he reflected on his own lust and desire for revenge, the poor sinner might have laughed rather than wept—unless he had either been truly struck by the lightning of the Law [Psalm 77:18] or had been tormented by the devil with a sorrowful spirit [1 Samuel 16:14]. Otherwise, this kind of contrition was certainly mere hypocrisy and did not put to death the lust for sins. They had to be contrite, but if they were free, they would rather have kept on sinning.

[19] As for Confession, the procedure was this: Everyone had to list all his sins (which is impossible). This was a great torment. If anyone had forgotten some sins, he would be absolved on the condition that, if they would occur to him, he must still confess them. So he could never know whether he had made a sufficiently pure confession or if confessing would ever come to an end. Yet he was pointed to his own works. He was comforted like this: The more fully you confess, and the more you humiliate yourself and debase yourself before the priest, the sooner and better you render satisfaction for your sins. Such humility would certainly earn grace before God.
