# February 10

## Psalmody

1 O LORD, rebuke me not in your | anger,* nor discipline me | in your wrath!
2 For your arrows have sunk | into me,* and your hand has come | down on me.
3 There is no soundness in my flesh because of your indig- | nation;* there is no health in my bones because | of my sin.
9 O Lord, all my longing is be- | fore you;* my sighing is not hid- | den from you.
10 My heart throbs; my strength | fails me,* and the light of my eyes—it also has | gone from me.
11 My friends and companions stand aloof | from my plague,* and my nearest kin stand | far off.
21 Do not forsake me, | O LORD!* O my God, be not | far from me!
22 Make haste to | help me,* O Lord, my sal- | vation!
—Psalm 38:1–3, 6, 9–11, 21–22
Additional Psalm: Psalm 38

## Old Testament Reading: Job 6:14–30

[Job Replies: My Complaint Is Just] 14“He who withholds kindness from a friend forsakes the fear of the Almighty. 15My brothers are treacherous as a torrent-bed, as torrential streams that pass away, 16which are dark with ice, and where the snow hides itself. 17When they melt, they disappear; when it is hot, they vanish from their place. 18The caravans turn aside from their course; they go up into the waste and perish. 19The caravans of Tema look, the travelers of Sheba hope. 20They are ashamed because they were confident; they come there and are disappointed. 21For you have now become nothing; you see my calamity and are afraid. 22Have I said, ‘Make me a gift’? Or, ‘From your wealth offer a bribe for me’? 23Or, ‘Deliver me from the adversary’s hand’? Or, ‘Redeem me from the hand of the ruthless’? 24“Teach me, and I will be silent; make me understand how I have gone astray. 25How forceful are upright words! But what does reproof from you reprove? 26Do you think that you can reprove words, when the speech of a despairing man is wind? 27You would even cast lots over the fatherless, and bargain over your friend. 28“But now, be pleased to look at me, for I will not lie to your face. 29Please turn; let no injustice be done. Turn now; my vindication is at stake. 30Is there any injustice on my tongue? Cannot my palate discern the cause of calamity?”

## New Testament Reading: John 3:22–4:6

John the Baptist Exalts Christ

22After this Jesus and his disciples went into the Judean countryside, and he remained there with them and was baptizing. 23John also was baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because water was plentiful there, and people were coming and being baptized 24(for John had not yet been put in prison). 25Now a discussion arose between some of John’s disciples and a Jew over purification. 26And they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, he who was with you across the Jordan, to whom you bore witness—look, he is baptizing, and all are going to him.” 27John answered, “A person cannot receive even one thing unless it is given him from heaven. 28You yourselves bear me witness, that I said, ‘I am not the Christ, but I have been sent before him.’ 29The one who has the bride is the bridegroom. The friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly at the bridegroom’s voice. Therefore this joy of mine is now complete. 30He must increase, but I must decrease.” 31He who comes from above is above all. He who is of the earth belongs to the earth and speaks in an earthly way. He who comes from heaven is above all. 32He bears witness to what he has seen and heard, yet no one receives his testimony. 33Whoever receives his testimony sets his seal to this, that God is true. 34For he whom God has sent utters the words of God, for he gives the Spirit without measure. 35The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand. 36Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life; whoever does not obey the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him.

Jesus and the Woman of Samaria

4:1Now when Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 2(although Jesus himself did not baptize, but only his disciples), 3he left Judea and departed again for Galilee. 4And he had to pass through Samaria. 5So he came to a town of Samaria called Sychar, near the field that Jacob had given to his son Joseph. 6Jacob’s well was there; so Jesus, wearied as he was from his journey, was sitting beside the well. It was about the sixth hour.

## Writing

It is the height of senselessness for the sentiments of the modern man when, in Luther’s Little Baptismal Book [Taufbüchlein] and in the old agendas of our Church, the child continues to be asked whether it forsakes the devil, if it will be baptized according to its faith, and if it will affirm the question: “Will you be baptized?” But it is not merely avowed liturgical conservatism or even thoughtlessness when the Church for nearly two thousand years has thus baptized infants as though they were adults, as though they could already confess with the mouth and believe with the heart. This is not the “as though” of mere fiction. It is much rather connected with the eschatological “as though” of the Sacrament of Baptism. God views us in Baptism as people who have already died and been raised, put to death with His beloved Son on Golgotha and raised from the dead on Easter morning. Thus he already views us as such who already believe, the poorest, weakest little child which we bring to Holy Baptism in “the understanding and hope that it will believe” in a way no different from a Basil, an Ambrose, or an Augustine, who as grown men and conscious Christians came to Baptism.
—Hermann Sasse

## Hymnody

He breaks the pow’r of canceled sin;
    He sets the pris’ner free.
His blood can make the foulest clean;
    His blood avails for me.
—Oh, for a Thousand Tongues to Sing (LSB 528:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and everlasting God, Your servant Silas preached the Gospel alongside the apostles Peter and Paul to the peoples of Asia Minor, Greece, and Macedonia. We give You thanks for raising up in this and every land evangelists and heralds of Your kingdom, that the Church may continue to proclaim the unsearchable riches of our Savior, Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1141) Silas, Fellow Worker of St. Peter and St. Paul Silas, a leader in the Church at Jerusalem, was chosen by Paul (Acts 15:40) to accompany him on his second missionary journey from Antioch to Asia Minor and Macedonia. Silas, also known as Silvanus, was imprisoned with Paul in Philippi and experienced the riots in Thessalonica and Berea. After rejoining Paul in Corinth, Silas apparently remained there for an extended time. Sometime later he apparently joined the apostle Peter, likely serving as Peter’s secretary (1 Peter 5:12). Tradition says that Silas was the first bishop at Corinth.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles III I–II

## ARTICLE I

## Sin

[1] Here we must confess, as Paul says in Romans 5:12, that sin originated from one man, Adam. By his disobedience, all people were made sinners and became subject to death and the devil. This is called original or the chief sin.

[2] The fruit of this sin are the evil deeds that are forbidden in the Ten Commandments [Galatians 5:19–21]. These include unbelief, false faith, idolatry, being without the fear of God, pride, despair, utter blindness, and, in short, not knowing or regarding God. Also lying, abusing God’s name, not praying, not calling on God, not regarding God’s Word, being disobedient to parents, murdering, being unchaste, stealing, deceiving, and such.

[3] This hereditary sin is such a deep corruption of nature that no reason can understand it. Rather, it must be believed from the revelation of Scripture. (See Psalm 51:5; Romans 6:12–13; Exodus 33:3; Genesis 3:7–19.) Therefore, it is nothing but error and blindness that the scholastic doctors have taught in regard to this article:

[4] Since Adam’s fall the natural powers of human beings have remained whole and uncorrupted, and by nature people have a right reason and a good will, as the philosophers teach.

[5] A person has a free will to do good and not to do evil, and, on the other hand, to not do good and do evil.

[6] By natural human powers a person can observe and keep all God’s commands.

[7] By natural human powers, a person can love God above all things and love his neighbors as himself.

[8] If a person does as much as is in him, God certainly grants him His grace.

[9] If a person wishes to go to the Sacrament, there is no need of a good intention to do good. It is enough if a person does not have a wicked purpose to commit sin, so entirely good is human nature and so effective is the Sacrament.

[10] Scripture does not teach that the Holy Spirit with His grace is necessary for a good work.

[11] These and many similar ideas have arisen from lack of understanding and ignorance, both about sin and about Christ, our Savior. They are truly heathen teachings that we cannot endure. For if such teaching were true, then Christ has died in vain. A human being would have no defect or sin for which He would have died. Or He would have died only for the body, not for the soul, since the soul is sound, and only the body is subject to death.

## ARTICLE II

## The Law

[1] Here we hold that the Law was given by God, first, to restrain sin by threats and the dread of punishment and by the promise and offer of grace and benefit. All this failed because of the evil that sin has worked in humanity.

[2] For by the Law some people were made worse sinners, those who are hostile to the Law because it forbids what they like to do and commands what they do not like to do [Romans 3:20; 7:7–9]. Wherever they can escape punishment, they do more against the Law than they did before. Those are the unrestrained and wicked, who do evil wherever they have the opportunity.

[3] The rest become blind and arrogant. As has been said above about the scholastic theologians, they conceive the opinion that they are able to keep the Law by their own powers. From this come the hypocrites and false saints.

[4] But the chief office or force of the Law is to reveal original sin with all its fruit. It shows us how very low our nature has fallen, how we have become utterly corrupted. The Law must tell us that we have no God, that we do not care for God, and that we worship other gods [Romans 3:10–18]—something we would not have believed before and without the Law. In this way, we become terrified, humbled, depressed. We despair and anxiously want help, but see no escape [Romans 7:21–24]. We begin to be an enemy of God and to complain, and so on [Romans 5:10].

[5] This is what Paul says, “The law brings wrath” (Romans 4:15). Sin is increased by the Law, “The law came in to increase the trespass” (Romans 5:20).
