# February 16

## Psalmody

1 He who dwells in the shelter of the | Most High* will abide in the shadow of the Al- | mighty.
2 I will say to the LORD, My refuge and my | fortress,* my God, in | whom I trust.”
3 For he will deliver you from the snare of the | fowler* and from the deadly | pestilence.
4 He will cover you with his pinions, and under his wings you will find | refuge;* his faithfulness is a shield and | buckler.
5 You will not fear the terror | of the night,* nor the arrow that | flies by day,
6 nor the pestilence that stalks in | darkness,* nor the destruction that wastes at | noonday.
14 “Because he holds fast to me in love, I will de- | liver him;* I will protect him, because he | knows my name.
15 When he calls to me, I will answer him; I will be with him in | trouble;* I will rescue him and | honor him.
16 With long life I will sat- | isfy him* and show him my sal- | vation.”
—Psalm 91:1–6, 14–16
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:1–8

## Old Testament Reading: Job 12:1–6, 12–25

Job Replies: The LORD Has Done This 1Then Job answered and said: 2“No doubt you are the people, and wisdom will die with you. 3But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you. Who does not know such things as these? 4I am a laughingstock to my friends; I, who called to God and he answered me, a just and blameless man, am a laughingstock. 5In the thought of one who is at ease there is contempt for misfortune; it is ready for those whose feet slip. 6The tents of robbers are at peace, and those who provoke God are secure, who bring their god in their hand.… 12“Wisdom is with the aged, and understanding in length of days. 13“With God are wisdom and might; he has counsel and understanding. 14If he tears down, none can rebuild; if he shuts a man in, none can open. 15If he withholds the waters, they dry up; if he sends them out, they overwhelm the land. 16With him are strength and sound wisdom; the deceived and the deceiver are his. 17He leads counselors away stripped, and judges he makes fools. 18He looses the bonds of kings and binds a waistcloth on their hips. 19He leads priests away stripped and overthrows the mighty. 20He deprives of speech those who are trusted and takes away the discernment of the elders. 21He pours contempt on princes and loosens the belt of the strong. 22He uncovers the deeps out of darkness and brings deep darkness to light. 23He makes nations great, and he destroys them; he enlarges nations, and leads them away. 24He takes away understanding from the chiefs of the people of the earth and makes them wander in a pathless waste. 25They grope in the dark without light, and he makes them stagger like a drunken man.”

## New Testament Reading: John 5:30–47

Witnesses to Jesus

30“I can do nothing on my own. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I seek not my own will but the will of him who sent me. 31If I alone bear witness about myself, my testimony is not deemed true. 32There is another who bears witness about me, and I know that the testimony that he bears about me is true. 33You sent to John, and he has borne witness to the truth. 34Not that the testimony that I receive is from man, but I say these things so that you may be saved. 35He was a burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light. 36But the testimony that I have is greater than that of John. For the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, bear witness about me that the Father has sent me. 37And the Father who sent me has himself borne witness about me. His voice you have never heard, his form you have never seen, 38and you do not have his word abiding in you, for you do not believe the one whom he has sent. 39You search the Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is they that bear witness about me, 40yet you refuse to come to me that you may have life. 41I do not receive glory from people. 42But I know that you do not have the love of God within you. 43I have come in my Father’s name, and you do not receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him. 44How can you believe, when you receive glory from one another and do not seek the glory that comes from the only God? 45Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one who accuses you: Moses, on whom you have set your hope. 46For if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote of me. 47But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?”

## Writing

The words in Genesis [3:15]: “The Seed will crush the head of the serpent,” signify nothing other than the same thing which John says: “For this the Son of God was revealed, that he might destroy the works of the devil” [1 John 3:8]. Adam understood the promise in this way, and thereafter all the patriarchs believed that on account of this promised seed their sins were forgiven them, and that they would be set free from sin and from eternal death. Through this faith they were righteous, not through fulfillment of the Law. By this faith they were raised up in all dangers and terrors. Indeed they knew that this Lord was present with them, as Jacob plainly says, in Gen. 48[:16]: “The Angel who set me free from all evil bless these boys”; for he proclaims him Lord who had set him free from all evils, and asks of him that he would bless his descendants. These things can be understood in no other way except as pertaining to the Son of God. Paul also says that the Son of God accompanied the camp of the people of Israel [1 Cor. 10:4]. John [1:5] also says that all things were made through this Son, and that the Light shines on the darkness. All triumphs against our adversary, the devil, are imparted through this Son. Noah was preserved, Abraham defended, Joseph brought out of prison, the people freed from Egypt, and Daniel also spoke with him. Thus the Gospel of the apostles preaches Christ, and testifies that He is the sacrificial victim, liberator, and Savior, and commands us to trust this leader and liberator, as also many statements of the prophets teach, as Ps. 2[:12] says: “Kiss the Son … blessed are all who trust in him.” And without this faith, i.e., trust in the mercy promised because of the Son, there is no true invocation of God, no true worship. For through this Priest we have access to the Father, as we often find written.
—Philip Melanchthon

## Hymnody

The Church from You, dear Master,
    Received the gift divine;
And still that light is lifted
    O’er all the earth to shine.
It is the chart and compass
    That, all life’s voyage through,
Mid mists and rocks and quicksands
    Still guides, O Christ, to You.
—O Word of God Incarnate (LSB 523:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, we praise You for the service of Philipp Melanchthon to the one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church in the renewal of its life in fidelity to Your Word and promise. Raise up in these gray and latter days faithful teachers and pastors, inspired by Your Spirit, whose voices will give strength to Your Church and proclaim the ongoing reality of Your kingdom; through Your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1147) Philipp Melanchthon (birth), Confessor Philipp Melanchthon (1497–1560) was a brilliant student of the classics and a humanist scholar. In 1518, he was appointed to teach along with Martin Luther at the University of Wittenberg. At Luther’s urging, Melanchthon began teaching theology and Scripture in addition to his courses in classical studies. In April 1530, Emperor Charles V called an official meeting between the representatives of Lutheranism and Roman Catholicism, hoping to effect a meeting of minds between two opposing groups. Since Luther was at that time under papal excommunication and an imperial ban, Melanchthon was assigned the duty of being the chief Lutheran representative at this meeting. He is especially remembered and honored as the author of the Augsburg Confession, which was officially presented by the German princes to the emperor on June 25, 1530, as the defining document of Lutheranism within Christendom. Melanchthon died on April 19, 1560.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Smalcald Articles III VIII

## ARTICLE VIII

## Confession

Radical reformers taught that people should seek God outside of His Word, looking instead to their inner feelings, thoughts, and other so-called spiritual experiences. (Luther calls them enthusiasts or Schwärmer, a German word for the buzzing of bees.) Many make the same claims today! This error is rooted deeply in all people as a result of the fall. It must be battled constantly. It is also the root source of papal errors. Luther makes this key point, “God does not wish to deal with us in any other way than through the spoken Word and the Sacraments.” He speaks; we listen. At His speaking, it is done. (See AC XI and XXV; SC V; Appendix B, Brief Exhortation to Confession.)

[1] Absolution, or the Power of the Keys, is an aid against sin and a consolation for a bad conscience; it is ordained by Christ in the Gospel [Matthew 16:19]. Therefore, Confession and Absolution should by no means be abolished in the Church. This is especially for the sake of timid consciences and untrained young people, so they may be examined and instructed in Christian doctrine.

[2] But the listing of sins should be free to everyone, as to what a person wishes to list or not to list. For as long as we are in the flesh, we will not lie when we say, “I am a poor man, full of sin”; “I see in my members another law”; and such (Romans 7:23). Since private Absolution originates in the Office of the Keys, it should not be despised, but greatly and highly esteemed, along with all other offices of the Christian Church.

[3] In issues relating to the spoken, outward Word, we must firmly hold that God grants His Spirit or grace to no one except through or with the preceding outward Word [Galatians 3:2, 5]. This protects us from the enthusiasts (i.e., souls who boast that they have the Spirit without and before the Word). They judge Scripture or the spoken Word and explain and stretch it at their pleasure, as Münzer did. Many still do this today, wanting to be sharp judges between the Spirit and the letter, and yet they do not know what they are saying [2 Corinthians 3:6].

[4] Actually, the papacy too is nothing but sheer enthusiasm. The pope boasts that all rights exist in the shrine of his heart. Whatever he decides and commands within his church is from the Spirit and is right, even though it is above and contrary to Scripture and the spoken Word.

[5] All this is the old devil and old serpent [Revelation 12:9], who also turned Adam and Eve into enthusiasts. He led them away from God’s outward Word to spiritualizing and self-pride [Genesis 3:2–5]. And yet, he did this through other outward words.

[6] In the same way, our enthusiasts today condemn the outward Word. Yet they themselves are not silent. They fill the world with their babbling and writings, as if the Spirit could not come through the apostles’ writings and spoken Word, but has to come through their writings and words. Why don’t they leave out their own sermons and writings and let the Spirit Himself come to people without their writings before them, as they boast that He has come into them without the preaching of the Scriptures? We do not have time now to argue about this in more detail. We have treated this well enough elsewhere.

[7] For even those who believe before being baptized, or become believing in Baptism, believe through the outward Word, which came first. For example, adults who have come to reason must first have heard “Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved” [Mark 16:16], even though they are at first unbelieving and receive the Spirit and Baptism ten years afterward.

[8] Cornelius, living among the Jews, had heard long before about the coming Messiah, through whom he was righteous before God (Acts 10:1–2). In such faith, his prayers and alms were acceptable to God (since Luke calls him devout and God-fearing). Without the Word coming first and without hearing it, he could not have believed or been righteous [Romans 10:17]. St. Peter, though, had to reveal to him that the Messiah (in whom he had previously believed as one who would come in the future) now had come, lest his faith in the coming Messiah hold him captive among the Jewish people, who were hardened and unbelieving. He must now know that he is saved by the present Messiah and must not, with the Jewish people, deny or persecute Him.

[9] In a word, enthusiasm dwells in Adam and his children from the beginning to the end of the world. Its venom has been implanted and infused into them by the old serpent. It is the origin, power, and strength of all heresy, especially of that of the papacy and Muhammad.

[10] Therefore, we must constantly maintain this point: God does not want to deal with us in any other way than through the spoken Word and the Sacraments. Whatever is praised as from the Spirit—without the Word and Sacraments—is the devil himself.

[11] God wanted to appear even to Moses through the burning bush and spoken Word [Exodus 3:2–15]. No prophet, neither Elijah nor Elisha, received the Spirit without the Ten Commandments ‹or the spoken Word›.

[12] John the Baptist was not conceived without the word of Gabriel coming first, nor did he leap in his mother’s womb without Mary’s voice [Luke 1:11–20, 41]. Peter says,

[13] “For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit” [2 Peter 1:21]. Without the outward Word, however, they were not holy. Much less would the Holy Spirit have moved them to speak when they were still unholy. They were holy, says he, since the Holy Spirit spoke through them.
