# February 21

## Psalmody

1 How lovely is your | dwelling place,* O | LORD of hosts!
2 My soul longs, yes, faints for the courts | of the LORD;* my heart and flesh sing for joy to the | living God.
3 Even the sparrow finds a home, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may | lay her young,* at your altars, O LORD of hosts, my King | and my God.
4 Blessèd are those who dwell | in your house,* ever sing- | ing your praise!
8 O LORD God of hosts, | hear my prayer;* give ear, O God of | Jacob!
9 Behold our shield, | O God;* look on the face of your a- | nointed!
10 For a day in your courts is better than a thousand | elsewhere.* I would rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than dwell in the tents of | wickedness.
11 For the LORD God is a sun and shield; the LORD bestows favor and | honor.* No good thing does he withhold from those who walk up- | rightly.
12 O | LORD of hosts,* blessèd is the one who | trusts in you!
—Psalm 84:1–4, 8–12
Additional Psalm: Psalm 64

## Old Testament Reading: Job 16:1–22

Job Replies: Miserable Comforters Are You 1Then Job answered and said: 2“I have heard many such things; miserable comforters are you all. 3Shall windy words have an end? Or what provokes you that you answer? 4I also could speak as you do, if you were in my place; I could join words together against you and shake my head at you. 5I could strengthen you with my mouth, and the solace of my lips would assuage your pain. 6“If I speak, my pain is not assuaged, and if I forbear, how much of it leaves me? 7Surely now God has worn me out; he has made desolate all my company. 8And he has shriveled me up, which is a witness against me, and my leanness has risen up against me; it testifies to my face. 9He has torn me in his wrath and hated me; he has gnashed his teeth at me; my adversary sharpens his eyes against me. 10Men have gaped at me with their mouth; they have struck me insolently on the cheek; they mass themselves together against me. 11God gives me up to the ungodly and casts me into the hands of the wicked. 12I was at ease, and he broke me apart; he seized me by the neck and dashed me to pieces; he set me up as his target; 13his archers surround me. He slashes open my kidneys and does not spare; he pours out my gall on the ground. 14He breaks me with breach upon breach; he runs upon me like a warrior. 15I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin and have laid my strength in the dust. 16My face is red with weeping, and on my eyelids is deep darkness, 17although there is no violence in my hands, and my prayer is pure. 18“O earth, cover not my blood, and let my cry find no resting place. 19Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and he who testifies for me is on high. 20My friends scorn me; my eye pours out tears to God, 21that he would argue the case of a man with God, as a son of man does with his neighbor. 22For when a few years have come I shall go the way from which I shall not return.”

## New Testament Reading: John 7:1–13

Jesus at the Feast of Booths

1After this Jesus went about in Galilee. He would not go about in Judea, because the Jews were seeking to kill him. 2Now the Jews’ Feast of Booths was at hand. 3So his brothers said to him, “Leave here and go to Judea, that your disciples also may see the works you are doing. 4For no one works in secret if he seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, show yourself to the world.” 5For not even his brothers believed in him. 6Jesus said to them, “My time has not yet come, but your time is always here. 7The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify about it that its works are evil. 8You go up to the feast. I am not going up to this feast, for my time has not yet fully come.” 9After saying this, he remained in Galilee. 10But after his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly but in private. 11The Jews were looking for him at the feast, and saying, “Where is he?” 12And there was much muttering about him among the people. While some said, “He is a good man,” others said, “No, he is leading the people astray.” 13Yet for fear of the Jews no one spoke openly of him.

## Writing

XIII: The Use of the Sacraments Our churches teach that the Sacraments were ordained, not only to be marks of profession among men, but even more, to be signs and testimonies of God’s will toward us. They were instituted to awaken and confirm faith in those who use them. Therefore, we must use the Sacraments in such a way that faith, which believes the promises offered and set forth through the Sacraments, is increased (2 Thessalonians 1:3). Therefore, they condemn those who teach that the Sacraments justify simply by the act of doing them. They condemn those who do not teach that faith, which believes that sins are forgiven, is required in the use of the Sacraments. XIV: Order in the Church Our churches teach that no one should publicly teach in the Church, or administer the Sacraments, without a rightly ordered call. XV: Church Ceremonies Our churches teach that ceremonies ought to be observed that may be observed without sin. Also, ceremonies and other practices that are profitable for tranquility and good order in the Church (in particular, holy days, festivals, and the like) ought to be observed. Yet, the people are taught that consciences are not to be burdened as though observing such things was necessary for salvation (Colossians 2:16– 17). They are also taught that human traditions instituted to make atonement with God, to merit grace, and to make satisfaction for sins are opposed to the Gospel and the doctrine of faith. So vows and traditions concerning meats and days, and so forth, instituted to merit grace and to make satisfaction for sins, are useless and contrary to the Gospel.
—Augsburg Confession XIII–XV

## Hymnody

“Blessed are God’s sons and daughters,
   Making peace where there is strife.
Blessed are the persecuted,
   Who for righteousness lose life;
Their reward is great in heaven,
   In the kingdom up above—
So be glad to share My suff’ring
   And rejoice to know My love.”
—Jesus Sat with His Disciples (LSB 932:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus Christ, Your time has come, for You have traveled to Jerusalem for the Passover from death to life. Help us to live knowing that the time of our redemption is at hand as You continue to dwell among us at the feast of Your very body and blood, a foretaste of the feast to come; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1149)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord I 11–25

[11] 1. We reject and condemn the teaching that original sin is only a debt based on what has been committed by another person ‹diverted to us› without any corruption of our nature.

[12] 2. We reject and condemn the teaching that evil lusts are not sin, but are created, essential properties of human nature. This is taught as though the above-mentioned defect and damage were not truly sin, because of which a person would be a child of wrath without Christ ‹not ingrafted into Christ›.

[13] 3. We likewise reject the Pelagian error. It alleged that human nature even after the fall is not corrupt, and especially in spiritual things human nature has remained entirely good and pure in its natural powers.

[14] 4. We reject the teaching that original sin is only a slight, insignificant spot on the outside, smeared on human nature, or a blemish that has been blown upon it, beneath which the nature has kept its good powers even in spiritual things.

[15] 5. We reject the teaching that original sin is only an outward obstacle to the good spiritual powers and not a spoiling or lack of the powers. It is not like when a magnet is smeared with garlic juice, and its natural power is not removed, but only blocked; or when a stain can be easily wiped away, like a spot from the face or paint from a wall.

[16] 6. We reject the teaching that in a person the human nature and essence are not entirely corrupt, but a person still has something good in him, even in spiritual things (e.g., capacity, skill, aptitude, or ability in spiritual things to begin, to work, or to help working for something good).

[17] 7. On the other hand, we also reject the false teaching of the Manichaeans, who taught that original sin, like something essential and self-sustaining, has been infused by Satan into human nature and intermingled with it, like when poison and wine are mixed.

[18] 8. We reject the teaching that the natural man does not sin, but something else sins apart from man and, on account of this, human nature is not accused but only original sin in the nature.

[19] 9. We also reject and condemn as a Manichaean error the teaching that original sin is properly and without any distinction the substance, nature, and essence itself of the corrupt person. This teaching states that a distinction between the corrupt nature (as such) after the fall and original sin should not even be conceived of, nor that they could be distinguished from each other even in thought.

[20] 10. Now, original sin is called by Dr. Luther “nature sin,” “person sin,” and “essential sin.” This is not because the nature, person, or essence of man is itself—without any distinction—original sin. He uses such words in order to show the distinction between original sin, which belongs to human nature, and other sins, which are called actual sins.

[21] 11. Original sin is not an actual sin that is committed. It is inherent to the nature, substance, and essence of humanity. So even if no wicked thought should ever arise in the heart of a corrupt person, no idle word should be spoken, no wicked deed should be done, human nature is still corrupted through original sin. Original sin is born in us because of the sinful seed and is a source of all other actual sins, such as wicked thoughts, words, and works, as it is written in Matthew 15:19, “out of the heart come evil thoughts.” Also [Genesis 8:21 says], “The intention of man’s heart is evil from his youth.” (See also Genesis 6:5.)

[22] 12. There is also to be noted well the different uses of the word nature, by which the Manichaeans hide their error and lead astray many simple people. For sometimes this word means the essence ‹the very substance› of man, as when it is said, “God created human nature.” At other times it means the attitude and the base quality of a thing, which belongs to its nature or essence, as when it is said, “The nature of the serpent is to bite, and the nature and way of man is to sin, and is sin.” Here the word nature does not mean the substance of man, but something that belongs to the nature or substance.

[23] 13. Now, consider the Latin terms substantia (substance) and accidens (a nonessential quality). They are not words of Holy Scripture and, besides, are unknown to the ordinary person. So they should not be used in sermons before ordinary, uninstructed people. Simple people should be spared them.

[24] But in the schools, among the learned, these words are rightly kept in disputes about original sin. For they are well known and used without any misunderstanding to distinguish exactly between the essence of a thing and what attaches to it in an accidental way.

[25] The distinction between God’s work and that of the devil is made in the clearest way by these terms. For the devil can create no substance, but can only, in an accidental way—with God’s consent—corrupt the substance created by God.
