# February 22

## Psalmody

15 My eyes are ever | toward the LORD,* for he will pluck my feet out | of the net.
16 Turn to me and be gra- | cious to me,* for I am lonely and af- | flicted.
17 The troubles of my heart | are enlarged;* bring me out of my dis- | tresses.
18 Consider my affliction and my | trouble,* and forgive | all my sins.
19 Consider how many | are my foes,* and with what violent hatred they | hate me.
20 Oh, guard my soul, and de- | liver me!* Let me not be put to shame, for I take ref- | uge in you.
21 May integrity and uprightness pre- | serve me, for I | wait for you.
22 Redeem Israel, | O God,* out of all his | troubles.
—Psalm 25:15–22
Additional Psalm: Psalm 114

## Old Testament Reading: Job 17:1–16

Job Continues: Where Then Is My Hope? 1“My spirit is broken; my days are extinct; the graveyard is ready for me. 2Surely there are mockers about me, and my eye dwells on their provocation. 3“Lay down a pledge for me with yourself; who is there who will put up security for me? 4Since you have closed their hearts to understanding, therefore you will not let them triumph. 5He who informs against his friends to get a share of their property—the eyes of his children will fail. 6“He has made me a byword of the peoples, and I am one before whom men spit. 7My eye has grown dim from vexation, and all my members are like a shadow. 8The upright are appalled at this, and the innocent stirs himself up against the godless. 9Yet the righteous holds to his way, and he who has clean hands grows stronger and stronger. 10But you, come on again, all of you, and I shall not find a wise man among you. 11My days are past; my plans are broken off, the desires of my heart. 12They make night into day: ‘The light,’ they say, ‘is near to the darkness.’ 13If I hope for Sheol as my house, if I make my bed in darkness, 14if I say to the pit, ‘You are my father,’ and to the worm, ‘My mother,’ or ‘My sister,’ 15where then is my hope? Who will see my hope? 16Will it go down to the bars of Sheol? Shall we descend together into the dust?”

## New Testament Reading: John 7:14–31

[Jesus at the Feast of Booths]

14About the middle of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching. 15The Jews therefore marveled, saying, “How is it that this man has learning, when he has never studied?” 16So Jesus answered them, “My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me. 17If anyone’s will is to do God’s will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own authority. 18The one who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory; but the one who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and in him there is no falsehood. 19Has not Moses given you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why do you seek to kill me?” 20The crowd answered, “You have a demon! Who is seeking to kill you?” 21Jesus answered them, “I did one work, and you all marvel at it. 22Moses gave you circumcision (not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers), and you circumcise a man on the Sabbath. 23If on the Sabbath a man receives circumcision, so that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because on the Sabbath I made a man’s whole body well? 24Do not judge by appearances, but judge with right judgment.”

Can This Be the Christ?

25Some of the people of Jerusalem therefore said, “Is not this the man whom they seek to kill? 26And here he is, speaking openly, and they say nothing to him! Can it be that the authorities really know that this is the Christ? 27But we know where this man comes from, and when the Christ appears, no one will know where he comes from.” 28So Jesus proclaimed, as he taught in the temple, “You know me, and you know where I come from? But I have not come of my own accord. He who sent me is true, and him you do not know. 29I know him, for I come from him, and he sent me.” 30So they were seeking to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. 31Yet many of the people believed in him. They said, “When the Christ appears, will he do more signs than this man has done?”

## Writing

When he himself says, “I came not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me,” this is the same kind of saying as, “My doctrine is not mine.” For if anyone possesses something, not of himself but from God, he should speak of it as God’s rather than his own. But no man has the truth he teaches, or a just will, from himself; these come from God. Christ came, then, not to do his own will, but to do the Father’s will, since the just will which he had came not from his humanity but from his divinity. But to say that God “spared not even his own Son, but delivered him up for us” simply means that he did not set him free. Many statements like this are found in Holy Scripture. Again, when he says, “Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt,” and, “if this chalice may not pass away, but I must drink it, thy will be done,” by his own will he means the natural desire for safety, by which his human flesh shrank from the pain of death. It is true that he speaks of the Father’s will, but not because the Father preferred the death of his Son to life—rather, because the Father was unwilling for the human race to be restored unless man performed a great act, equal to the Son’s death. Since reason did not demand what another could not do, the Son says that the Father wills his death, while he himself prefers to suffer death rather than leave the human race unsaved.
—Anselm of Canterbury

## Hymnody

“Yes, Father, yes, most willingly
   I’ll bear what You command Me.
My will conforms to Your decree,
   I’ll do what You have asked Me.”
O wondrous Love, what have You done!
The Father offers up His Son,
   Desiring our salvation.
O Love, how strong You are to save!
You lay the One into the grave
   Who built the earth’s foundation.
—A Lamb Goes Uncomplaining Forth (LSB 438:3)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, on this day You once taught the hearts of Your faithful people by sending them the light of Your Holy Spirit. Grant us in our day by the same Spirit to have a right understanding in all things and evermore to rejoice in His holy consolation; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L50)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord II 1–6

[1] The will of mankind is found in four different states: (1) before the fall; (2) since the fall; (3) after regeneration; and (4) after the resurrection of the body. The chief question in this article is only about the will and ability of mankind in the second state. That is, what powers in spiritual matters does a person have after the fall of our first parents and before regeneration? Can a person by his own powers—prior to and before his regeneration by God’s Spirit—get ready and prepare himself for God’s grace? Can a person accept ‹and apprehend› or reject the grace offered through the Holy Spirit in the Word and holy ‹divinely instituted› Sacraments?

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

The Pure Teaching about This Article, according to God’s Word

[2] 1. This is our teaching, faith, and confession on this subject: in spiritual matters the understanding and reason of mankind are ‹completely› blind and by their own powers understand nothing, as it is written in 1 Corinthians 2:14, “The natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him, and he is not able to understand them because they are spiritually discerned.”

[3] 2. Likewise, we believe, teach, and confess that the unregenerate will of mankind is not only turned away from God, but also has become God’s enemy. So it only has an inclination and desire for that which is evil and contrary to God, as it is written in Genesis 8:21, “the intention of man’s heart is evil from his youth.” Romans 8:7 says, “The mind that is set on the flesh is hostile to God, for it does not submit to God’s law; indeed, it cannot.” Just as a dead body cannot raise itself to bodily, earthly life, so a person who by sin is spiritually dead cannot raise himself to spiritual life. For it is written in Ephesians 2:5, “even when we were dead in our trespasses, [He] made us alive together with Christ.” And 2 Corinthians 3:5 says, “Not that we are sufficient in ourselves to claim anything as coming from us, but our sufficiency is from God.”

[4] 3. God the Holy Spirit, however, does not bring about conversion without means. For this purpose He uses the preaching and hearing of God’s Word, as it is written in Romans 1:16, the Gospel “is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes.”

[5] Also Romans 10:17 says, “Faith comes from hearing, and hearing through the word of Christ.” It is God’s will that His Word should be heard and that a person’s ears should not be closed (Psalm 95:8). With this Word the Holy Spirit is present and opens hearts, so that people (like Lydia in Acts 16:14) pay attention to it and are converted only through the Holy Spirit’s grace and power, who alone does the work of converting a person.

[6] For without His grace, and if He does not grant the increase, our willing and running, our planting, sowing, and watering (1 Corinthians 3:5–7)—are all nothing. As Christ says ‹in John 15:5›, “apart from Me you can do nothing.” With these brief words the Spirit denies free will its powers and ascribes everything to God’s grace, in order that no one may boast before God (1 Corinthians 1:29; [2 Corinthians 12:5; Jeremiah 9:23]).

NEGATIVE STATEMENTS

Contrary False Teaching
