# February 28

## Psalmody

8 Bless our God, O | peoples;* let the sound of his | praise be heard,
9 who has kept our soul among the | living* and has not let our | feet slip.
10 For you, O God, have | tested us;* you have tried us as sil- | ver is tried.
11 You brought us in- | to the net;* you laid a crushing burden | on our backs;
12 you let men ride o- | ver our heads;* we went through fire and through water; yet you have brought us out to a place of a- | bundance.
16 Come and hear, all you who | fear God,* and I will tell what he has done | for my soul.
17 I cried to him | with my mouth,* and high praise was | on my tongue.
18 If I had cherished iniquity | in my heart,* the Lord would not have | listened.
19 But truly God has | listened;* he has attended to the voice | of my prayer.
20 Blessèd | be God,* because he has not rejected my prayer or removed his steadfast | love from me!
—Psalm 66:8–12, 16–20
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:169–176

## Old Testament Reading: Job 31:1–12, 33–40

Job’s Final Appeal

1“I have made a covenant with my eyes; how then could I gaze at a virgin? 2What would be my portion from God above and my heritage from the

Almighty on high?

3Is not calamity for the unrighteous, and disaster for the workers of iniquity? 4Does not he see my ways and number all my steps? 5“If I have walked with falsehood and my foot has hastened to deceit; 6(Let me be weighed in a just balance, and let God know my integrity!) 7if my step has turned aside from the way and my heart has gone after my eyes, and if any spot has stuck to my hands, 8then let me sow, and another eat, and let what grows for me be rooted out. 9“If my heart has been enticed toward a woman, and I have lain in wait at my neighbor’s door, 10then let my wife grind for another, and let others bow down on her. 11For that would be a heinous crime; that would be an iniquity to be punished by the judges; 12for that would be a fire that consumes as far as Abaddon, and it would burn to the root all my increase.… 33[“If] I have concealed my transgressions as others do by hiding my iniquity in my bosom, 34because I stood in great fear of the multitude, and the contempt of families terrified me, so that I kept silence, and did not go out of doors—35Oh, that I had one to hear me! (Here is my signature! Let the Almighty answer me!) Oh, that I had the indictment written by my adversary! 36Surely I would carry it on my shoulder; I would bind it on me as a crown; 37I would give him an account of all my steps; like a prince I would approach him. 38“If my land has cried out against me and its furrows have wept together, 39if I have eaten its yield without payment and made its owners breathe their last, 40let thorns grow instead of wheat, and foul weeds instead of barley.” The words of Job are ended.

## New Testament Reading: John 9:24–41

[Jesus Heals a Man Born Blind]

24So for the second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him, “Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.” 25He answered, “Whether he is a sinner I do not know. One thing I do know, that though I was blind, now I see.” 26They said to him, “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?” 27He answered them, “I have told you already, and you would not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become his disciples?” 28And they reviled him, saying, “You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses. 29We know that God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, we do not know where he comes from.” 30The man answered, “Why, this is an amazing thing! You do not know where he comes from, and yet he opened my eyes. 31We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshiper of God and does his will, God listens to him. 32Never since the world began has it been heard that anyone opened the eyes of a man born blind. 33If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.” 34They answered him, “You were born in utter sin, and would you teach us?” And they cast him out. 35Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him he said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?” 36He answered, “And who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?” 37Jesus said to him, “You have seen him, and it is he who is speaking to you.” 38He said, “Lord, I believe,” and he worshiped him. 39Jesus said, “For judgment I came into this world, that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.” 40Some of the Pharisees near him heard these things, and said to him, “Are we also blind?” 41Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, you would have no guilt; but now that you say, ‘We see,’ your guilt remains.”

## Writing

They are especially honored who for the sake of the truth and the confession of Christ suffer anything terrible and are insulted. Truly, he who loses his possessions for His sake, he is the one who will be found to be rich; he who hates his own life, he is the one who will be most loved; and in the same way, he who is insulted, he is the one who will be most honored. Surely this is shown in the case of the blind man. The Jews cast him out from the temple, and the Lord of the temple found him. He was separated from that pestilent company and met with the Fountain of salvation. He was dishonored by those who dishonored Christ and was honored by the Lord of Sabaoth. Such are the prizes of truth.… The Evangelist shows that Jesus came for the purpose of meeting that blind man. And having met him, observe how Jesus makes amends for losses he has suffered. He makes recompense by that which is the most prized of blessings. For He made Himself known to him who before knew Him not, and enrolled him into the company of His own disciples.… Hear also Paul: “What shall we say, then? That Gentiles who did not pursue righteousness have attained it, that is, a righteousness that is by faith; but that Israel who pursued a law that would lead to righteousness did not succeed in reaching that law” [Romans 9:30–31]. By saying, “For judgment I am came into this world,” He both made the man stronger respecting the faith, and aroused those who followed Him, for the Pharisees were following Him. And the “for judgment” He spoke with reference to a greater punishment, showing that, having given sentence against Him, they had received sentence against themselves; that having condemned Him as a sinner, they were themselves the persons condemned. In this passage, He speaks of two recoveries of sight and two blindnesses: one sensible, the other spiritual.
—John Chrysostom

## Hymnody

O gently call those gone astray
That they may find the saving way!
Let ev’ry conscience sore oppressed
In You find peace and heav’nly rest.
—O Christ, Our True and Only Light (LSB 839:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, as Your Son gave sight to the blind man, giving the man eyes to see the one who is the healer of the nations, so give us sight to see the salvation prepared for us in Him who opens our eyes in the breaking of the bread; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1151)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord VI

## VI. THE THIRD USE OF GOD’S LAW

## STATUS OF THE CONTROVERSY

THE CHIEF QUESTION IN THIS CONTROVERSY

[1] The Law was given to people for three reasons: (1) that by the Law outward discipline might be maintained against wild, disobedient people; (2) that people may be led to the knowledge of their sins by the Law; and (3) that after they are regenerate and ‹much of› the flesh still cleaves to them, they might on this account have a fixed rule according to which they are to regulate and direct their whole life. A dissension has arisen between a few theologians about the third use of the Law, namely, whether it is to be taught to regenerate Christians. The one side has said Yes; the other, No.

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

The True Christian Teaching about This Controversy

[2] 1. We believe, teach, and confess that, even though people who are truly believing ‹in Christ› and truly converted to God have been freed and exempted from the curse and coercion of the Law, they are still not without the Law on this account. They have been redeemed by God’s Son in order that they may exercise themselves in the Law day and night ([Psalm 1:2;] Psalm 119). Even our first parents before the fall did not live without Law. They had God’s Law written into their hearts, because they were created in God’s image (Genesis 1:26–27; 2:16–17; 3:3).

[3] 2. We believe, teach, and confess that the preaching of the Law is to be encouraged diligently. This applies not only for the unbelieving and impenitent, but also for true believers, who are truly converted, regenerate, and justified through faith.

[4] 3. Although believers are regenerate and renewed in the spirit of their mind, in the present life this regeneration and renewal is not complete. It is only begun. Believers are, by the spirit of their mind, in a constant struggle against the flesh. They struggle constantly against the corrupt nature and character, which cleaves to us until death. This old Adam still dwells in the understanding, the will, and all the powers of humanity. It is necessary that the Law of the Lord always shine before them, so that they may not start self-willed and self-created forms of serving God drawn from human devotion. The Law of the Lord is also necessary so that the old Adam [Romans 6:6] may not use his own will, but may be subdued against his will. This happens not only by the warning and threatening of the Law, but also by punishments and blows, so that a person may follow and surrender himself as a captive to the Spirit. (See 1 Corinthians 9:27; Romans 6:12; 7; 12; Galatians 5; 6:14; Psalm 119; Hebrews 13:21; 12:1.)

[5] 4. Now, consider the distinction between the works of the Law [Galatians 2:16] and the fruit of the Spirit [Galatians 5:22–23]. We believe, teach, and confess that the works of the Law are those that are done according to the Law. They are called works of the Law as long as they are only forced out of a person by teaching the punishment and threatening of God’s wrath.

[6] 5. Fruits of the Spirit, however, are the works wrought by God’s Spirit, who dwells in believers. The Spirit works through the regenerate. These works are done by believers because they are regenerate ‹spontaneously and freely›. They act as though they knew of no command, threat, or reward. In this way God’s children live in the Law and walk according to God’s Law. St. Paul calls this the “law of Christ” and the “Law of my mind” in his letters. (See Romans 7:23–25; 8:7; 8:2 [; Galatians 6:2].)

[7] 6. The Law is and remains—both to the penitent and impenitent, both to regenerate and unregenerate people—one and the same Law. It is God’s unchangeable will. The difference, as far as obedience is concerned, is only in the person. For one who is not yet regenerate follows the Law out of constraint and unwillingly does what it requires of him (as also the regenerate do according to the flesh). But the believer, so far as he is regenerate, acts without constraint and with a willing spirit to do what no threat of the Law ‹however severe› could ever force him to do.

NEGATIVE STATEMENTS

False Contrary Doctrine

[8] We reject the teaching that the Law must not be applied to Christians and true believers (in the way and degree mentioned above) but only to unbelievers, non-Christians, and the unrepentant. Such a teaching would be erroneous, which harms and conflicts with Christian discipline and true godliness.
