# February 25

## Psalmody

1 Praise the LORD! Blessèd is the man who | fears the LORD,* who greatly delights in his com- | mandments!
2 His offspring will be mighty | in the land;* the generation of the upright | will be blessed.
3 Wealth and riches are | in his house,* and his righteousness endures for- | ever.
4 Light dawns in the darkness for the | upright;* he is gracious, merciful, and | righteous.
5 It is well with the man who deals generous- | ly and lends;* who conducts his affairs with | justice.
6 For the righteous will nev- | er be moved;* he will be remembered for- | ever.
7 He is not afraid of | bad news;* his heart is firm, trusting | in the LORD.
8 His heart is steady; he will not | be afraid,* until he looks in triumph on his adver- | saries.
9 He has distributed freely; he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures for- | ever;* his horn is exalted in | honor.
10 The wicked man sees it and is angry; he gnashes his teeth and | melts away;* the desire of the wicked will | perish!
—Psalm 112
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:57–64

## Old Testament Reading: Job 20:1–23, 29

Zophar Speaks: The Wicked Will Suffer 1Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said: 2“Therefore my thoughts answer me, because of my haste within me. 3I hear censure that insults me, and out of my understanding a spirit answers me. 4Do you not know this from of old, since man was placed on earth, 5that the exulting of the wicked is short, and the joy of the godless but for a moment? 6Though his height mount up to the heavens, and his head reach to the clouds, 7he will perish forever like his own dung; those who have seen him will say, ‘Where is he?’ 8He will fly away like a dream and not be found; he will be chased away like a vision of the night. 9The eye that saw him will see him no more, nor will his place any more behold him. 10His children will seek the favor of the poor, and his hands will give back his wealth. 11His bones are full of his youthful vigor, but it will lie down with him in the dust. 12“Though evil is sweet in his mouth, though he hides it under his tongue, 13though he is loath to let it go and holds it in his mouth, 14yet his food is turned in his stomach; it is the venom of cobras within him. 15He swallows down riches and vomits them up again; God casts them out of his belly. 16He will suck the poison of cobras; the tongue of a viper will kill him. 17He will not look upon the rivers, the streams flowing with honey and curds. 18He will give back the fruit of his toil and will not swallow it down; from the profit of his trading he will get no enjoyment. 19For he has crushed and abandoned the poor; he has seized a house that he did not build. 20“Because he knew no contentment in his belly, he will not let anything in which he delights escape him. 21There was nothing left after he had eaten; therefore his prosperity will not endure. 22In the fullness of his sufficiency he will be in distress; the hand of everyone in misery will come against him. 23To fill his belly to the full, God will send his burning anger against him and rain it upon him into his body.… 29This is the wicked man’s portion from God, the heritage decreed for him by God.”

## New Testament Reading: John 8:21–38

[I Am the Light of the World]

21So he said to them again, “I am going away, and you will seek me, and you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.” 22So the Jews said, “Will he kill himself, since he says, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come’?” 23He said to them, “You are from below; I am from above. You are of this world; I am not of this world. 24I told you that you would die in your sins, for unless you believe that I am he you will die in your sins.” 25So they said to him, “Who are you?” Jesus said to them, “Just what I have been telling you from the beginning. 26I have much to say about you and much to judge, but he who sent me is true, and I declare to the world what I have heard from him.” 27They did not understand that he had been speaking to them about the Father. 28So Jesus said to them, “When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and that I do nothing on my own authority, but speak just as the Father taught me. 29And he who sent me is with me. He has not left me alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to him.” 30As he was saying these things, many believed in him.

The Truth Will Set You Free

31So Jesus said to the Jews who had believed in him, “If you abide in my word, you are truly my disciples, 32and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” 33They answered him, “We are offspring of Abraham and have never been enslaved to anyone. How is it that you say, ‘You will become free’?” 34Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, everyone who commits sin is a slave to sin. 35The slave does not remain in the house forever; the son remains forever. 36So if the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. 37I know that you are offspring of Abraham; yet you seek to kill me because my word finds no place in you. 38I speak of what I have seen with my Father, and you do what you have heard from your father.”

## Writing

He serves freely who freely does the will of his master. Accordingly he who is slave to sin is free to sin. But thereafter he will not be free to do right unless he is delivered from the bondage of sin and begins to be the servant of righteousness. This, then, is true liberty: the joy that comes in doing what is right. At the same time, it is also devoted service in obedience to righteous precept. But how would a man, bound and sold, get back his liberty to do good, unless he could regain it from Him whose voice said, “If the Son shall make you free, then you will be free indeed”? But before this process begins in man, could anyone glory in his good works as if they were acts of his free will, when he is not yet free to act rightly? He could do this only if, puffed up in proud vanity, he were merely boasting. This attitude is what the apostle was reproving when he said, “By grace you have been saved by faith.” And lest men should arrogate to themselves saving faith as their own work and not understand it as a divine gift, the same apostle who says somewhere else that he had “obtained mercy of the Lord to be trustworthy” makes here an additional comment: “And this is not of yourselves, rather it is a gift of God—not because of works either, lest any man should boast.” But then, lest it be supposed that the faithful are lacking in good works, he added further, “For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God has prepared beforehand for us to walk in them.”
—Augustine of Hippo

## Hymnody

Thanks we give and adoration
    For Your Gospel’s joyful sound.
May the fruits of Your salvation
    In our hearts and lives abound.
Ever faithful, ever faithful
To Your truth may we be found.
—Lord, Dismiss Us with Your Blessing (LSB 924:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and gracious Lord, pour out Your Holy Spirit on Your faithful people. Keep us steadfast in Your grace and truth, protect and deliver us in times of temptation, defend us against all enemies, and grant to Your Church Your saving peace; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F33)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord III 12–23 and IV 1–4

[12] We reject and condemn all the following errors:

[13] 1. Christ is our Righteousness according to His divine nature alone.

[14] 2. Christ is our Righteousness according to His human nature alone.

[15] 3. Where the righteousness of faith is spoken of in the sayings of the prophets and apostles, the words justify and to be justified are not to mean “declaring or being declared free from sins,” and “obtaining the forgiveness of sins.” But they actually mean “being made righteous before God, because of love infused by the Holy Spirit, virtues, and the works following them.”

[16] 4. Faith not only looks to Christ’s obedience, but also to His divine nature, since it dwells and works in us, and by this indwelling our sins are covered.

[17] 5. Faith is the sort of trust in Christ’s obedience that can exist and remain in a person even when he has no genuine repentance, in whom also no love follows, but who persists in sins against his conscience.

[18] 6. Not God Himself, but only God’s gifts dwell in believers.

[19] 7. Faith saves on this account: because the renewal by faith is begun in us, which dwells in love for God and one’s neighbor.

[20] 8. Faith has the first place in justification, yet renewal and love also belong to our righteousness before God in a particular way. Although ‹renewal and love› are not the chief cause of our righteousness, nevertheless our righteousness before God is not entire or perfect without such love and renewal.

[21] 9. Believers are justified before God and saved jointly by Christ’s righteousness credited to them and by the new obedience begun in them. Or, believers are justified in part by the credit of Christ’s righteousness, but in part also by the new obedience begun in them.

[22] 10. The promise of grace is made our own through faith in the heart, by the confession made with the mouth, and by other virtues.

[23] 11. Faith does not justify without good works, so that good works are necessarily required for righteousness, and without their presence a person cannot be justified.

[1] 1. First, some theologians have become divided because of the following expressions. One side wrote, “Good works are necessary for salvation. It is impossible to be saved without good works.” They also wrote, “No one has ever been saved without good works.” But the other side, on the contrary, wrote, “Good works are harmful to salvation.”

[3] 2. Afterward, a schism arose between some theologians because of the two words necessary and free. The one side argued that the word necessary should not be used about the new obedience, which, they say, does not flow from necessity and coercion, but from a voluntary spirit. The other side insisted on the word necessary. They say obedience is not our option, but regenerate people are obliged to render this obedience.

[4] From this dispute about the terms, a controversy arose afterward about the subject itself. For the one side contended that among Christians the Law should not be presented at all, but people should be encouraged to do good works from the Holy Gospel alone. The other side contradicted this.

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

The Pure Teaching of the Christian Churches about This Controversy
