# February 27

## Psalmody

5 Blessèd is he whose help is the God of | Jacob,* whose hope is in the | LORD his God,
6 who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is | in them,* who keeps faith for- | ever;
7 who executes justice for | the oppressed,* who gives food to the | hungry. The LORD sets the prisoners free; 8 the LORD opens the eyes | of the blind.* The LORD lifts up those who are bowed down; the LORD loves the | righteous.
9 The LORD watches over the sojourners; he upholds the widow and the | fatherless,* but the way of the wicked he brings to | ruin.
10 The LORD will reign for- | ever,* your God, O Zion, to all generations. | Praise the LORD!
—Psalm 146:5–10
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:89–96

## Old Testament Reading: Job 30:16–31

[Job’s Summary Defense]

16“And now my soul is poured out within me; days of affliction have taken hold of me. 17The night racks my bones, and the pain that gnaws me takes no rest. 18With great force my garment is disfigured; it binds me about like the collar of my tunic. 19God has cast me into the mire, and I have become like dust and ashes. 20I cry to you for help and you do not answer me; I stand, and you only look at me. 21You have turned cruel to me; with the might of your hand you persecute me. 22You lift me up on the wind; you make me ride on it, and you toss me about in the roar of the storm. 23For I know that you will bring me to death and to the house appointed for all living. 24“Yet does not one in a heap of ruins stretch out his hand, and in his disaster cry for help? 25Did not I weep for him whose day was hard? Was not my soul grieved for the needy? 26But when I hoped for good, evil came, and when I waited for light, darkness came. 27My inward parts are in turmoil and never still; days of affliction come to meet me. 28I go about darkened, but not by the sun; I stand up in the assembly and cry for help. 29I am a brother of jackals and a companion of ostriches. 30My skin turns black and falls from me, and my bones burn with heat. 31My lyre is turned to mourning, and my pipe to the voice of those who weep.”

## New Testament Reading: John 9:1–23

Jesus Heals a Man Born Blind

1As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth. 2And his disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?” 3Jesus answered, “It was not that this man sinned, or his parents, but that the works of God might be displayed in him. 4We must work the works of him who sent me while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work. 5As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.” 6Having said these things, he spat on the ground and made mud with the saliva. Then he anointed the man’s eyes with the mud 7and said to him, “Go, wash in the pool of Siloam” (which means Sent). So he went and washed and came back seeing. 8The neighbors and those who had seen him before as a beggar were saying, “Is this not the man who used to sit and beg?” 9Some said, “It is he.” Others said, “No, but he is like him.” He kept saying, “I am the man.” 10So they said to him, “Then how were your eyes opened?” 11He answered, “The man called Jesus made mud and anointed my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ So I went and washed and received my sight.” 12They said to him, “Where is he?” He said, “I do not know.” 13They brought to the Pharisees the man who had formerly been blind. 14Now it was a Sabbath day when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes. 15So the Pharisees again asked him how he had received his sight. And he said to them, “He put mud on my eyes, and I washed, and I see.” 16Some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath.” But others said, “How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?” And there was a division among them. 17So they said again to the blind man, “What do you say about him, since he has opened your eyes?” He said, “He is a prophet.” 18The Jews did not believe that he had been blind and had received his sight, until they called the parents of the man who had received his sight 19and asked them, “Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How then does he now see?” 20His parents answered, “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind. 21But how he now sees we do not know, nor do we know who opened his eyes. Ask him; he is of age. He will speak for himself.” 22(His parents said these things because they feared the Jews, for the Jews had already agreed that if anyone should confess Jesus to be Christ, he was to be put out of the synagogue.) 23Therefore his parents said, “He is of age; ask him.”

## Writing

Job is excused though he was not troubled by past evil deeds [Job 2:3– 10]. Therefore, troubles are not always punishments or signs of wrath. Indeed, terrified consciences should be taught that there are more important purposes for afflictions [2 Corinthians 12:9], so that they do not think God is rejecting them when they see nothing but God’s punishment and anger in troubles. The other more important purposes are to be considered, that is, that God is doing His strange work so that He may be able to do His own work, as Isaiah 28 teaches in a long speech. When the disciples asked about the blind man who sinned, Christ replies that the cause of his blindness is not sin, but that “the works of God might be displayed in him” (John 9:2– 3). In Jere-miah it is said, “If those who did not deserve to drink the cup must drink it …” (49:12). So the prophets, John the Baptist, and other saints were killed [Matthew 5:11]. Therefore, troubles are not always punishments for certain past deeds, but they are God’s works, intended for our benefit, and that God’s power might be made more apparent in our weakness. So Paul says God’s strength “is made perfect in weakness” (2 Corinthians 12:9). Because of God’s will, our bodies should be sacrifices, to declare our obedience, and not to pay for eternal death. God has another price for that: the death of His own Son.
—Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIIB (VI) 61–63 [158–160]

## Hymnody

Fill with the radiance of Your grace
The souls now lost in error’s maze;
Enlighten those whose inmost minds
Some dark delusion haunts and blinds.
—O Christ, Our True and Only Light (LSB 839:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, our heavenly Father, Your mercies are new every morning; and though we deserve only punishment, You receive us as Your children and provide for all our needs of body and soul. Grant that we may heartily acknowledge Your merciful goodness, give thanks for all Your benefits, and serve You in willing obedience; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L26)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord V

## V. THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL

## STATUS OF THE CONTROVERSY

THE CHIEF QUESTION IN THIS CONTROVERSY

[1] Is the preaching of the Holy Gospel properly not just a preaching of grace (which announces the forgiveness of sins) but also a preaching of repentance and reproof (rebuking unbelief, which some people say is not rebuked in the Law but only through the Gospel)?

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

The Pure Doctrine of God’s Word

[2] 1. We believe, teach, and confess that the distinction between the Law and the Gospel is to be kept in the Church with great diligence as a particularly brilliant light. By this distinction, according to the admonition of St. Paul, God’s Word is rightly divided [2 Timothy 2:15].

[3] 2. We believe, teach, and confess that the Law is properly a divine doctrine [Romans 7:12]. It teaches what is right and pleasing to God, and it rebukes everything that is sin and contrary to God’s will.

[4] 3. For this reason, then, everything that rebukes sin is, and belongs to, the preaching of the Law.

[5] 4. But the Gospel is properly the kind of teaching that shows what a person who has not kept the Law (and therefore is condemned by it) is to believe. It teaches that Christ has paid for and made satisfaction for all sins [Romans 5:9]. Christ has gained and acquired for an individual—without any of his own merit—forgiveness of sins, righ-teousness that avails before God, and eternal life [Romans 5:10].

[6] 5. The term Gospel is not used in one and the same sense in the Holy Scriptures. That’s why this disagreement originally arose. Therefore, we believe, teach, and confess that if the term Gospel is understood to mean Christ’s entire teaching that He proposed in His ministry, as His apostles did also (this is how it is used in Mark 1:15; Acts 20:21), then it is correctly said and written that the Gospel is a preaching of repentance and of the forgiveness of sins.

[7] 6. The Law and the Gospel are also contrasted with each other. Likewise also, Moses himself as a teacher of the Law and Christ as a preacher of the Gospel are contrasted with each other [John 1:17]. In these cases we believe, teach, and confess that the Gospel is not a preaching of repentance or rebuke. But it is properly nothing other than a preaching of consolation and a joyful message that does not rebuke or terrify. The Gospel comforts consciences against the terrors of the Law, points only to Christ’s merit, and raises them up again by the lovely preaching of God’s grace and favor, gained through Christ’s merit.

[8] 7. Concerning the revelation of sin, Moses’ veil hangs [2 Corinthians 3:12–16] before the eyes of all people as long as they hear the bare preaching of the Law, and nothing about Christ. Therefore, they do not learn from the Law to see their sins correctly. They either become bold hypocrites ‹who swell with the opinion of their own righ-teousness› like the Pharisees [Matthew 23], or they despair like Judas [Matthew 27:3–5]. Therefore, Christ takes the Law into His hands and explains it spiritually (Matthew 5:21–48; Romans 7:14). In this way God’s wrath is revealed from heaven against all sinners [Romans 1:18], so that they see how great it is. In this way they are directed back to the Law, and then they first learn from it to know their sins correctly—a knowledge that Moses never could have forced out of them.

[9] According to this, the preaching of the suffering and death of Christ, the Son of God, is a serious and terrifying proclamation and declaration of God’s wrath. By such preaching people are first led into the Law correctly—after Moses’ veil has been removed from them. Then they understand correctly for the first time what great things God requires of us in His Law, none of which we can keep. Therefore, they know we are to seek all our righteousness in Christ.

[10] 8. Yet as long as all this (namely, Christ’s suffering and death) proclaims God’s wrath and terrifies a person, it is still not properly the preaching of the Gospel. It remains the preaching of Moses and the Law, and it is, therefore, an alien work of Christ. Passing through this teaching, Christ arrives at His proper office, that is, to preach grace, console, and give life, which is properly the preaching of the Gospel.

NEGATIVE STATEMENTS

Contrary Doctrine That Is Rejected

[11] We reject and regard as incorrect and harmful the teaching that the Gospel, strictly speaking, is a preaching of repentance or rebuke and not just a preaching of grace. For by this misuse the Gospel is converted into a teaching of the Law. Christ’s merit and Holy Scripture are hidden, Christians are robbed of true consolation, and the door is opened again to ‹the errors and superstitions of› the papacy.
