# February 29

## Psalmody

1 The LORD is my | shepherd;* I | shall not want.
2 He makes me lie down in green | pastures.* He leads me beside still | waters.
3 He re- | stores my soul.* He leads me in paths of righteousness for his | name’s sake.
4 Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are | with me;* your rod and your staff, they | comfort me.
5 You prepare a table before me in the presence of my | enemies;* you anoint my head with oil; my cup | overflows.
6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days | of my life,* and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD for- | ever.
—Psalm 23
Additional Psalm: Psalm 120

## Old Testament Reading: Job 32:1–22

Elihu Rebukes Job’s Three Friends

1So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes. 2Then Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, burned with anger. He burned with anger at Job because he justified himself rather than God. 3He burned with anger also at Job’s three friends because they had found no answer, although they had declared Job to be in the wrong. 4Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job because they were older than he. 5And when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, he burned with anger. 6And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said: “I am young in years, and you are aged; therefore I was timid and afraid to declare my opinion to you. 7I said, ‘Let days speak, and many years teach wisdom.’ 8But it is the spirit in man, the breath of the Almighty, that makes him understand. 9It is not the old who are wise, nor the aged who understand what is right. 10Therefore I say, ‘Listen to me; let me also declare my opinion.’ 11“Behold, I waited for your words, I listened for your wise sayings, while you searched out what to say. 12I gave you my attention, and, behold, there was none among you who refuted Job or who answered his words. 13Beware lest you say, ‘We have found wisdom; God may vanquish him, not a man.’ 14He has not directed his words against me, and I will not answer him with your speeches. 15“They are dismayed; they answer no more; they have not a word to say. 16And shall I wait, because they do not speak, because they stand there, and answer no more? 17I also will answer with my share; I also will declare my opinion. 18For I am full of words; the spirit within me constrains me. 19Behold, my belly is like wine that has no vent; like new wineskins ready to burst. 20I must speak, that I may find relief; I must open my lips and answer. 21I will not show partiality to any man or use flattery toward any person. 22For I do not know how to flatter, else my Maker would soon take me away.”

## New Testament Reading: John 10:1–21

I Am the Good Shepherd

1“Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the door but climbs in by another way, that man is a thief and a robber. 2But he who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. 3To him the gatekeeper opens. The sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. 4When he has brought out all his own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. 5A stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him, for they do not know the voice of strangers.” 6This figure of speech Jesus used with them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them. 7So Jesus again said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep. 8All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. 9I am the door. If anyone enters by me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture. 10The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life and have it abundantly. 11I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. 12He who is a hired hand and not a shepherd, who does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf snatches them and scatters them. 13He flees because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep. 14I am the good shepherd. I know my own and my own know me, 15just as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep. 16And I have other sheep that are not of this fold. I must bring them also, and they will listen to my voice. So there will be one flock, one shepherd. 17For this reason the Father loves me, because I lay down my life that I may take it up again. 18No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it up again. This charge I have received from my Father.” 19There was again a division among the Jews because of these words. 20Many of them said, “He has a demon, and is insane; why listen to him?” 21Others said, “These are not the words of one who is oppressed by a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?”

## Writing

I really would like to see a truly Christian council, so that many people and issues might be helped. Not that we need help. Our churches are now, through God’s grace, enlightened and equipped with the pure Word and right use of the Sacraments, with knowledge of the various callings and right works. So, on our part, we ask for no council. On such points, we have nothing better to hope or expect from a council. But we see throughout the bishops’ jurisdictions so many parishes vacant and desolate that it breaks our heart. Still, neither the bishops nor the Church officials care how the poor people live or die. Christ has died for them, and yet they are not allowed to hear Him speak as the true Shepherd with His sheep [John 10:11–18]. This makes me shudder and fear that someday He might send a council of angels upon Germany who will utterly destroy us like Sodom and Gomorrah [Genesis 19:1–25] for wickedly mocking Him with the pretext of a council.—Smalcald Articles Preface 10–11 Even though the adversaries claim the name of Church for themselves, we know that Christ’s Church is with those who teach Christ’s Gospel, not with those who defend wicked opinions contrary to the Gospel. As the Lord says, “My sheep hear My voice” (John 10:27). And Augustine says: The question is, “Where is the Church?” What, therefore, are we to do? Are we to seek it in our own words or in the words of its Head, our Lord Jesus Christ? I think that we ought to seek it in the words of Him who is Truth, and who knows His own body best.
—Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 279 [400]

## Hymnody

We are Yours; in love befriend us,
   Be the guardian of our way;
Keep Your flock, from sin defend us,
   Seek us when we go astray.
Blessed Jesus, blessed Jesus,
   Hear us children when we pray.
Blessed Jesus, blessed Jesus,
   Hear us children when we pray.
—Savior, Like a Shepherd Lead Us (LSB 711:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, merciful Father, since You have wakened from death the Shepherd of Your sheep, grant us Your Holy Spirit that when we hear the voice of our Shepherd we may know Him who calls us each by name and follow where He leads; through the same Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L43)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord VII 1–20

[1] The Zwinglian teachers are not to be counted among the theologians who receive ‹acknowledge and profess› the Augsburg Confession. They separated from our theologians at the very time when this Confession was presented. Yet they are advancing themselves and are attempting—under the name of this Christian Confession—to spread their error. Therefore, we also intend to make a necessary statement about this controversy ‹in which we have judged that the Church of Christ should be instructed›.

## STATUS OF THE CONTROVERSY

CHIEF CONTROVERSY BETWEEN OUR TEACHING AND THAT OF THE SACRAMENTARIANS REGARDING THIS ARTICLE

[2] Question: In the Holy Supper, are the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ (a) truly and essentially present, (b) distributed with the bread and wine, and (c) received with the mouth by all those who use this Sacrament—whether they are worthy or unworthy, godly or ungodly, believing or unbelieving? Are they received by the believing for consolation and life, but by the unbelieving for judgment? The Sacramentarians say No. We say Yes.

[3] To explain this controversy, it must be noted in the beginning that there are two kinds of Sacramentarians. Some are openly crass Sacramentarians. They declare in plain, clear words what they believe in their hearts, that in the Holy Supper nothing but bread and wine is present, distributed, and received with the mouth.

[4] Others, however, are crafty Sacramentarians. They are the most harmful of all. In part, they talk very fancy, using our own words. They pretend that they also believe a true presence of the true, essential, living body and blood of Christ in the Holy Supper. However, they say that this happens spiritually through faith.

[5] Nevertheless, under these fancy words they hold precisely the former crass opinion, namely, that in the Holy Supper nothing is present and received with the mouth except bread and wine. For with them the word spiritually means nothing other than the Spirit of Christ or the power of Christ’s absent body and His merit that is present. But for them Christ’s body is in no mode or way present, except above in the highest heaven. They say we should elevate ourselves into heaven by the thoughts of our faith. And there—not at all in the bread and wine of the Holy Supper—we should seek Christ’s body and blood.

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

Confession of the Pure Teaching about the Holy Supper against the Sacramentarians

[6] 1. We believe, teach, and confess that in the Holy Supper Christ’s body and blood are truly and essentially present, and that they are truly distributed and received with the bread and wine.

[7] 2. We believe, teach, and confess that the words of Christ’s testament are not to be understood in any other way than the way they read, according to the letter. So the bread does not signify Christ’s absent body and the wine His absent blood. But, because of the sacramental union, ‹the bread and wine› are truly Christ’s body and blood.

[8] 3. Now, about the consecration, we believe, teach, and confess that no work of man or recitation of the minister produces this presence of Christ’s body and blood in the Holy Supper. Instead, this presence is to be credited only and alone to the almighty power of our Lord Jesus Christ.

[9] 4. At the same time we also believe, teach, and confess unanimously that in the use of the Holy Supper the words of Christ’s institution should in no way be left out. Instead, they should be publicly recited, as it is written in 1 Corinthians 10:16, “The cup of blessing that we bless” and so forth. This blessing occurs through the reciting of Christ’s words.

[10] 5. In this matter the ground on which we stand against the Sacramentarians is what Dr. Luther has laid down in his Confession concerning Christ’s Supper (LW 37:214).

[11] “The first point is this article of our Christian faith: Jesus Christ is true, essential, natural, perfect God and man in one person, undivided and inseparable.”

[12] The second: God’s “right hand” is everywhere. Christ is placed there in deed and in truth according to His human nature. He is present, rules, and has in His hands, and beneath His feet, everything that is in heaven and on earth ‹as Scripture says in Ephesians 1:22›, where no other man or angel, but only Mary’s Son is placed. Therefore, He can do this.

[13] The third: God’s Word is not false or deceitful [Titus 1:1–3]).

[14] The fourth: God has and knows of various ways to be in any place, and not only one way, which philosophers call local (localis).

[15] 6. We believe, teach, and confess that Christ’s body and blood are received with the bread and wine, not only spiritually through faith, but also orally. Yet not in a “Capernaitic” way, but in a supernatural, heavenly way, because of the sacramental union. Christ’s words clearly show this, when Christ gives direction to take, eat, and drink, as was also done by the apostles. For it is written in Mark 14:23, “And they all drank of it.” St. Paul likewise says [in 1 Corinthians 10:16], “The bread that we break, is it not a participation in the body of Christ?” That is to say: He who eats this bread eats Christ’s body, which also the chief ancient teachers of the Church—Chrysostom, Cyprian, Leo I, Gregory, Ambrose, Augustine—unanimously testify.

[16] 7. We believe, teach, and confess that not only the true believers in Christ and the worthy, but also the unworthy and unbelievers receive Christ’s true body and blood. However, they do not receive them for life and consolation, but for judgment and condemnation, if they are not converted and do not repent (1 Corinthians 11:27–29).

[17] Although they thrust Christ as a Savior away from themselves, yet they must receive Him, even against their will, as a strict Judge. They must admit that He is just as present to exercise and render judgment on unrepentant guests as He is present to work life and consolation in the hearts of the true believers and worthy guests.

[18] 8. We believe, teach, and confess also that there is only one kind of unworthy guests: those who do not believe. About these guests it is written in John 3:18, “Whoever does not believe is condemned already.” And this judgment becomes greater and more grievous, being aggravated by the unworthy use of the Holy Supper (1 Corinthians 11:29).

[19] 9. We believe, teach, and confess that no true believer—as long as he has living faith, however weak he may be—receives the Holy Supper to his judgment. For the Supper was instituted especially for Christians weak in faith, yet repentant. It was instituted for their consolation and to strengthen their weak faith [Matthew 9:12; 11:5, 28].

[20] 10. We believe, teach, and confess that all the worthiness of guests of this heavenly feast is and is founded on Christ’s most holy obedience and perfect merit alone. We receive these for ourselves by true faith, and by the Sacrament we are assured of them. Our worthiness is not at all in our virtues or inward and outward preparations.

NEGATIVE STATEMENTS

Contrary, Condemned Teachings of the Sacramentarians
