# March 2

## Psalmody

1 I love the LORD, because | he has heard* my voice and my pleas for | mercy.
2 Because he inclined his | ear to me,* therefore I will call on him as long | as I live.
3 The snares of death encompassed me; the pangs of Sheol laid | hold on me;* I suffered distress and | anguish.
4 Then I called on the name | of the LORD:* “O LORD, I pray, deliv- | er my soul!”
5 Gracious is the LORD, and | righteous;* our God is | merciful.
6 The LORD preserves the | simple;* when I was brought low, he | saved me.
7 Return, O my soul, | to your rest;* for the LORD has dealt bountifully | with you.
8 For you have delivered my | soul from death,* my eyes from tears, my feet from | stumbling;
9 I will walk be- | fore the LORD* in the land of the | living.
—Psalm 116:1–9
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:49–56

## Old Testament Reading: Job 33:19–34:9

[Elihu Rebukes Job]

19“Man is also rebuked with pain on his bed and with continual strife in his bones, 20so that his life loathes bread, and his appetite the choicest food. 21His flesh is so wasted away that it cannot be seen, and his bones that were not seen stick out. 22His soul draws near the pit, and his life to those who bring death. 23If there be for him an angel, a mediator, one of the thousand, to declare to man what is right for him, 24and he is merciful to him, and says, ‘Deliver him from going down into the pit; I have found a ransom; 25let his flesh become fresh with youth; let him return to the days of his youthful vigor’; 26then man prays to God, and he accepts him; he sees his face with a shout of joy, and he restores to man his righteousness. 27He sings before men and says: ‘I sinned and perverted what was right, and it was not repaid to me. 28He has redeemed my soul from going down into the pit, and my life shall look upon the light.’ 29“Behold, God does all these things, twice, three times, with a man, 30to bring back his soul from the pit, that he may be lighted with the light of life. 31Pay attention, O Job, listen to me; be silent, and I will speak. 32If you have any words, answer me; speak, for I desire to justify you. 33If not, listen to me; be silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”

Elihu Asserts God’s Justice

34:1Then Elihu answered and said: 2“Hear my words, you wise men, and give ear to me, you who know; 3for the ear tests words as the palate tastes food. 4Let us choose what is right; let us know among ourselves what is good. 5For Job has said, ‘I am in the right, and God has taken away my right; 6in spite of my right I am counted a liar; my wound is incurable, though I am without transgression.’ 7What man is like Job, who drinks up scoffing like water, 8who travels in company with evildoers and walks with wicked men? 9For he has said, ‘It profits a man nothing that he should take delight in God.’”

## New Testament Reading: John 11:1–16

The Death of Lazarus

1Now a certain man was ill, Lazarus of Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha. 2It was Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was ill. 3So the sisters sent to him, saying, “Lord, he whom you love is ill.” 4But when Jesus heard it he said, “This illness does not lead to death. It is for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.” 5Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. 6So, when he heard that Lazarus was ill, he stayed two days longer in the place where he was. 7Then after this he said to the disciples, “Let us go to Judea again.” 8The disciples said to him, “Rabbi, the Jews were just now seeking to stone you, and are you going there again?” 9Jesus answered, “Are there not twelve hours in the day? If anyone walks in the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. 10But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.” 11After saying these things, he said to them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I go to awaken him.” 12The disciples said to him, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.” 13Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that he meant taking rest in sleep. 14Then Jesus told them plainly, “Lazarus has died, 15and for your sake I am glad that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.” 16So Thomas, called the Twin, said to his fellow disciples, “Let us also go, that we may die with him.”

## Writing

St. Paul exhorts the Thessalonians [I Thess. 4:13–18] not to sorrow over the dead as others who have no hope, but to comfort each other with God’s Word as having a certain hope of life and of the resurrection of the dead. It is little wonder if those are sad who have no hope. Nor can they be blamed for it. Since they are beyond the pale of faith in Christ, they must either cherish this temporal life as the only thing worthwhile and hate to lose it, or they must expect that after this life they will receive eternal death and the wrath of God in hell and must fear to go there. But we Christians, who have been redeemed from all this by the dear blood of the Son of God, should by faith train and accustom ourselves to despise death and to regard it as a deep, strong, and sweet sleep, to regard the coffin as nothing but paradise and the bosom of our Lord Christ, and the grave as nothing but a soft couch or sofa, which it really is in the sight of God; for he says, John 11[:11], “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep,” and Matthew 9[:24], “The girl is not dead but sleeping.” Thus, too, St. Paul in I Corinthians 15[:42–44] bans from his sight every ugly aspect of death in our mortal body and brings to the fore a wholly delightful and joyous picture of life when he says: “What is sown is perishable, what is raised is imperishable.… It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.”
—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

I am content! At length I shall be free,
   Awakened from the dead,
Arising glorious evermore to be
   With You, my living head.
The chains that hold my body, sever;
Then shall my soul rejoice forever.
   I am content!
    I am content!
—I Am Content! My Jesus Ever Lives (LSB 468:4)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, Your Son shines with the brightness of the true Light. Grant that as we have known the mysteries of that Light on earth we may also come to the fullness of His joys in heaven; through the same Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1152)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord VIII 1–9

## VIII. THE PERSON OF CHRIST

From the controversy about the Holy Supper a disagreement has arisen between the pure theologians of the Augsburg Confession and the Calvinists. The Calvinists have also confused some other theologians about the person of Christ and the two natures in Christ and their properties.

## STATUS OF THE CONTROVERSY

THE CHIEF QUESTIONS IN THIS CONTROVERSY

[2] The chief question, however, has been this: Because of the personal union, do the divine and human natures, and also their properties, really [realiter] have communion with each other? In other words (in deed and truth), do the divine and human natures commune with each other in the person of Christ, and how far does this communion extend?

[3] The Sacramentarians have asserted that the divine and human natures in Christ are united personally in such a way that neither one has real communion. This means (in deed and truth) that they do not share with the other nature what is unique to either nature. They share nothing more than the name alone. For they plainly say, “The personal union does nothing more than make the names common.” In other words, God is called man, and man is called God. Yet this happens in such a way that the divine has no real communion (that is, in deed and truth) with humanity. And humanity has nothing in common with divinity, its majesty, and properties. Dr. Luther and those who agreed with him have contended against the Sacramentarians for the contrary teaching.

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

The Pure Teaching of the Christian Church about the Person of Christ

[4] To explain this controversy and settle it according to the guidance ‹analogy› of our Christian faith, our doctrine, faith, and confession is as follows:

[5] 1. The divine and human natures in Christ are personally united. So there are not two Christs, one the Son of God and the other the Son of Man. But one and the same person is the Son of God and Son of Man (Luke 1:35; Romans 9:5).

[6] 2. We believe, teach, and confess that the divine and human natures are not mingled into one substance, nor is one changed into the other. Each keeps its own essential properties, which can never become the properties of the other nature.

[7] 3. The properties of the divine nature are these: to be almighty, eternal, infinite, and to be everywhere present (according to the property of its nature and its natural essence, of itself), to know everything, and so on. These never become properties of the human nature.

[8] 4. The properties of the human nature are to be a bodily creature, to be flesh and blood, to be finite and physically limited, to suffer, to die, to ascend and descend, to move from one place to another, to suffer hunger, thirst, cold, heat, and the like. These never become properties of the divine nature.

[9] 5. The two natures are united personally (i.e., in one person). Therefore, we believe, teach, and confess that this union is not the kind of joining together and connection that prevents either nature from having anything in common with the other personally (i.e., because of the personal union). It is not like when two boards are glued together, where neither gives anything to the other or takes anything from the other. But here is described the highest communion that God truly has with the man. From this personal union, the highest and indescribable communion results. There flows everything human that is said and believed about God, and everything divine that is said and believed about the man Christ. The ancient teachers of the Church explained this union and communion of the natures by the illustration of iron glowing with fire, and also by the union of body and soul in man.
