# March 6

## Psalmody

1 The LORD says to my Lord: “Sit at my | right hand,* until I make your enemies your | footstool.”
2 The LORD sends forth from Zion your mighty | scepter.* Rule in the midst of your | enemies!
3 Your people will offer themselves freely on the day of your power, in holy | garments;* from the womb of the morning, the dew of your youth | will be yours.
4 The LORD has sworn and will not | change his mind,* “You are a priest forever after the order of Mel- | chizedek.”
5 The Lord is at your | right hand;* he will shatter kings on the day | of his wrath.
6 He will execute judgment among the nations, filling them with | corpses;* he will shatter chiefs over the | wide earth.
7 He will drink from the brook | by the way;* therefore he will lift | up his head.
—Psalm 110
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:17–24

## Old Testament Reading: Job 38:1–18

The LORD Answers Job

1Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind and said: 2“Who is this that darkens counsel by words without knowledge? 3Dress for action like a man; I will question you, and you make it known to me. 4“Where were you when I laid the foundation of the earth? Tell me, if you have understanding. 5Who determined its measurements—surely you know! Or who stretched the line upon it? 6On what were its bases sunk, or who laid its cornerstone, 7when the morning stars sang together and all the sons of

God shouted for joy?

8“Or who shut in the sea with doors when it burst out from the womb, 9when I made clouds its garment and thick darkness its swaddling band, 10and prescribed limits for it and set bars and doors, 11and said, ‘Thus far shall you come, and no farther, and here shall your proud waves be stayed’? 12“Have you commanded the morning since your days began, and caused the dawn to know its place, 13that it might take hold of the skirts of the earth, and the wicked be shaken out of it? 14It is changed like clay under the seal, and its features stand out like a garment. 15From the wicked their light is withheld, and their uplifted arm is broken. 16“Have you entered into the springs of the sea, or walked in the recesses of the deep? 17Have the gates of death been revealed to you, or have you seen the gates of deep darkness? 18Have you comprehended the expanse of the earth? Declare, if you know all this.” Additional Reading: Job 38:19–39:30

## New Testament Reading: John 12:20–36a

Some Greeks Seek Jesus

20Now among those who went up to worship at the feast were some Greeks. 21So these came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and asked him, “Sir, we wish to see Jesus.” 22Philip went and told Andrew; Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus. 23And Jesus answered them, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. 24Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit. 25Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. 26If anyone serves me, he must follow me; and where I am, there will my servant be also. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.

The Son of Man Must Be Lifted Up

27“Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? But for this purpose I have come to this hour. 28Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came from heaven: “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.” 29The crowd that stood there and heard it said that it had thundered. Others said, “An angel has spoken to him.” 30Jesus answered, “This voice has come for your sake, not mine. 31Now is the judgment of this world; now will the ruler of this world be cast out. 32And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.” 33He said this to show by what kind of death he was going to die. 34So the crowd answered him, “We have heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever. How can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?” 35So Jesus said to them, “The light is among you for a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, lest darkness overtake you. The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going. 36While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light.”

## Writing

[Holy Communion] is a promise of the forgiveness of sins made to us by God, and such a promise as has been confirmed by the death of the Son of God. For the only difference between a promise and a testament is that the testament involves the death of the one who makes it. A testator is a promiser who is about to die, while a promiser (if I may put it thus) is a testator who is not about to die. This testament of Christ is foreshadowed in all the promises of God from the beginning of the world; indeed, whatever value those ancient promises possessed was altogether derived from this new promise that was to come in Christ. Hence the words “compact,” “covenant,” and “testament of the Lord” occur so frequently in the Scriptures. These words signified that God would one day die. “For where there is a testament, the death of the testator must of necessity occur” (Heb. 9[:16]). Now God made a testament; therefore, it was necessary that he should die. But God could not die unless he became man. Thus the incarnation and the death of Christ are both comprehended most concisely in this one word, “testament.” … [Access to God’s promise is] gained, not with any works, or powers, or merits of one’s own, but by faith alone. For where there is the Word of the promising God, there must necessarily be the faith of the accepting man. It is plain therefore, that the beginning of our salvation is a faith which clings to the Word of the promising God, who, without any effort on our part, in free and unmerited mercy takes the initiative and offers us the word of his promise.
—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

We praise You, Lord, for Philip,
   Blest guide to Greek and Jew,
And for young James the faithful,
   Who heard and followed You.
O grant us grace to know You,
   The way, the truth, the life,
To wrestle with temptation,
   To triumph in the strife.
—By All Your Saints in Warfare(LSB 518:16)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful God, Your Son, Jesus Christ, was lifted high upon the cross that He might bear the sins of the world and draw all people to Himself. Grant that we who glory in His death for our redemption may faithfully heed His call to bear the cross and follow Him, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F27)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord XI 1–15

[1] No public disagreement has arisen among the theologians of the Augsburg Confession about this article. But since election is a comforting article—if treated properly—and to prevent offensive disputes about it in the future, it is also explained in this writing.

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

The Pure and True Teaching about This Article

[2] 1. To begin with, the distinction between God’s foreknowledge and His eternal predestination ought to be kept accurately.

[3] 2. God’s foreknowledge is nothing else than this: God knows all things before they happen, as it is written in Daniel 2:28, “But there is a God in heaven who reveals mysteries, and He has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar what will be in the latter days.”

[4] 3. This foreknowledge extends over the godly and the wicked alike. But it is not the cause of evil or of sin. In other words, it is not what causes people to do wrong (which originally arises from the devil and mankind’s wicked, perverse will). Nor does it cause their ruin, for which they themselves are responsible. But foreknowledge only regulates this and fixes a limit on their ruin, ‹how far it should progress and› how long it should last. All this happens to serve His elect for their salvation, even though such ruin is evil in itself.

[5] 4. Predestination, or God’s eternal election, covers only the godly, beloved children of God. It is a cause of their salvation, which He also provides. He plans what belongs to it as well. Our salvation is founded so firmly on it that the gates of hell cannot overcome it (John 10:28; Matthew 16:18).

[6] 5. It is not to be investigated in God’s secret counsel. It is to be sought in God’s Word, where it is revealed.

[7] 6. God’s Word leads us to Christ, who is the Book of Life, in whom all are written and elected who are to be saved in eternity. For it is written in Ephesians 1:4, “Even as He chose us in Him [Christ] before the foundation of the world.”

[8] 7. Christ calls all sinners to Himself and promises them rest. He is eager ‹seriously wills› that all people should come to Him and allow themselves to be helped. He offers them Himself in His Word and wants them to hear it and not to plug their ears or ‹neglect and› despise the Word. Furthermore, He promises the power and working of the Holy Spirit and divine assistance for perseverance and eternal salvation ‹so that we may remain steadfast in the faith and gain eternal salvation›.

[9] 8. We should not reach conclusions about our election to eternal life based on reason or God’s Law. That would lead us either into a reckless, loose, Epicurean life or into despair. It would stir up destructive thoughts in people’s hearts. For they cannot, as long as they follow their reason, successfully keep themselves from thinking, “If God has elected me to salvation, I cannot be condemned, no matter what I do.” And again, “If I am not elected to eternal life, it doesn’t matter what good I do; it is all in vain anyway.”

[10] 9. ‹The true judgment about predestination› must be learned alone from the Holy Gospel about Christ, in which it is clearly testified, “For God has consigned all to disobedience, that He may have mercy on all [Romans 11:32]; not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance” [2 Peter 3:9], and believe in the Lord Christ. (See also Ezekiel 18:23; 33:11, 18; 1 John 2:2.)

[11] 10. Now, let whoever is concerned about God’s revealed will act on the order that St. Paul has described in the Epistle to the Romans. Paul first directs people to repentance [Romans 1–2], to knowledge of sins [Romans 3:1–20], to faith in Christ [Romans 3:21–5:21], to divine obedience [Romans 6–8]. Then he speaks of the mystery of God’s eternal election [Romans 9–11]. This doctrine is useful and consolatory to the person who proceeds in this way.

[12] 11. However, “many are called, but few are chosen” [Matthew 22:14]. This does not mean that God is unwilling to save everybody. But the reason some are not saved is as follows: They do not listen to God’s Word at all, but willfully despise it, plug their ears, and harden their hearts. In this way they block the ordinary way [Luke 16:29–31] for the Holy Spirit so He cannot perform His work in them. Or, when they have heard God’s Word, they make light of it again and ignore it. But their wickedness is responsible for this ‹that they perish›, not God or His election (2 Peter 2:1–3; Luke 11:49–52; Hebrews 12:25–26).

[13] 12. A Christian should concern himself ‹in meditation› with the article about God’s eternal election only as far as it has been revealed in God’s Word. His Word presents Christ to us as the Book of Life, which He opens and reveals to us by the preaching of the Holy Gospel, as it is written in Romans 8:30, “And those whom He predestined He also called.” In Him we are to seek the eternal election of the Father, who has determined in His eternal divine counsel [Ephesians 1:11–12] that He would save no one except those who know His Son Christ and truly believe in Him. Other thoughts are to be ‹entirely› banished ‹from the minds of the godly›. For they do not come from God, but from the suggestion of the evil foe. With such thoughts he attempts to weaken or entirely remove us from the glorious comfort we have in this helpful doctrine. In other words, we know ‹assuredly› that out of pure grace, without any merit of our own, we have been elected in Christ to eternal life. No one can pluck us out of His hand [John 10:29]. He has not only promised this gracious election with mere words, but has also certified it with an oath and sealed it with the holy Sacraments. We can ‹ought to› call these to mind in our most severe temptations and take comfort in them, and with them we can quench the fiery darts of the devil [Ephesians 6:16].

[14] 13. Besides, we should act with the greatest diligence, to live according to God’s will. As St. Peter encourages in 2 Peter 1:10, “make your calling and election sure.” We should especially cling to ‹not recede a hair’s width from› the revealed Word, which cannot and will not fail us.

[15] 14. By this brief explanation of God’s eternal election, glory is entirely and fully given to God. Out of pure mercy alone, without any of our merit, He saves us according to the purpose of His will. No reason is given to anyone for despair or a vulgar, wild life. ‹No opportunity is afforded either for those more severe agitations of mind and faint-heartedness or for Epicureanism.›

ANTITHESES OR NEGATIVE STATEMENTS

False Teachings about This Article
