# March 7

## Psalmody

1 I lift up my eyes | to the hills.* From where does my | help come?
2 My help comes | from the LORD,* who made | heaven and earth.
3 He will not let your | foot be moved;* he who keeps you will not | slumber.
4 Behold, he who keeps | Israel* will neither slum- | ber nor sleep.
5 The LORD is your | keeper;* the LORD is your shade on your | right hand.
6 The sun shall not strike | you by day,* nor the | moon by night.
7 The LORD will keep you from all | evil;* he will | keep your life.
8 The LORD will keep your going out and your | coming in* from this time forth and for- | evermore.
—Psalm 121
Additional Psalm: Psalm 26

## Old Testament Reading: Job 40:1–24

1And the LORD said to Job: 2“Shall a faultfinder contend with the Almighty? He who argues with God, let him answer it.”

Job Promises Silence

3Then Job answered the LORD and said: 4“Behold, I am of small account; what shall I answer you? i lay my hand on my mouth. 5I have spoken once, and I will not answer; twice, but I will proceed no further.”

The LORD Challenges Job

6Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind and said: 7“Dress for action like a man; I will question you, and you make it known to me. 8Will you even put me in the wrong? Will you condemn me that you may be in the right? 9Have you an arm like God, and can you thunder with a voice like his? 10“Adorn yourself with majesty and dignity; clothe yourself with glory and splendor. 11Pour out the overflowings of your anger, and look on everyone who is proud and abase him. 12Look on everyone who is proud and bring him low and tread down the wicked where they stand. 13Hide them all in the dust together; bind their faces in the world below. 14Then will I also acknowledge to you that your own right hand can save you. 15“Behold, Behemoth, which I made as I made you; he eats grass like an ox. 16Behold, his strength in his loins, and his power in the muscles of his belly. 17He makes his tail stiff like a cedar; the sinews of his thighs are knit together. 18His bones are tubes of bronze, his limbs like bars of iron. 19“He is the first of the works of God; let him who made him bring near his sword! 20For the mountains yield food for him where all the wild beasts play. 21Under the lotus plants he lies, in the shelter of the reeds and in the marsh. 22For his shade the lotus trees cover him; the willows of the brook surround him. 23Behold, if the river is turbulent he is not frightened; he is confident though Jordan rushes against his mouth. 24Can one take him by his eyes, or pierce his nose with a snare?”

## New Testament Reading: John 12:36b–50

The Unbelief of the People When Jesus had said these things, he departed and hid himself from them. 37Though he had done so many signs before them, they still did not believe in him, 38so that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled: “Lord, who has believed what he heard from us, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?” 39Therefore they could not believe. For again Isaiah said, 40“He has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, lest they see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and turn, and I would heal them.” 41Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke of him. 42Nevertheless, many even of the authorities believed in him, but for fear of the Pharisees they did not confess it, so that they would not be put out of the synagogue; 43for they loved the glory that comes from man more than the glory that comes from God.

Jesus Came to Save the World

44And Jesus cried out and said, “Whoever believes in me, believes not in me but in him who sent me. 45And whoever sees me sees him who sent me. 46I have come into the world as light, so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness. 47If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the world but to save the world. 48The one who rejects me and does not receive my words has a judge; the word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day. 49For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment—what to say and what to speak. 50And I know that his commandment is eternal life. What I say, therefore, I say as the Father has told me.”

## Writing

To know how we obtain our justification, it is expedient to consider, first, how miscreant and sinful we, who are Adam’s kindred, all are; and in contrast, what mercifulness is in God, who pardons all the offenses of all faithful and penitent sinners for Christ’s sake. No person who has ever heard of the fall of Adam, which infected all his posterity, is lightly ignorant of these two things. Nor should anyone be casually ignorant of the in- explicable mercy of our heavenly Father, who sent His only-begotten Son to suffer His most grievous Passion for us and shed His most precious blood as the price of our redemption. But it is greatly to be wished and desired that as all Christian people know this, so also that every person might acknowledge and undoubtedly believe it to be true and verified. Thus he may both humble himself toward God and also know himself to be a miserable sinner not worthy to be called His son, and yet surely trust that God’s mercy is ready to forgive all those who are repentant. And the person who does not see these two things verified in himself can take no manner of due payment and profit by acknowledging and believing these things to be verified in others. But we cannot satisfy our minds, or settle our consciences, that these things are true, unless we see that God’s Word so teaches this to us.
—Thomas Cranmer

## Hymnody

Light us to those heav’nly spheres,
   Sun of grace, in glory shrouded;
Lead us through this vale of tears
   To the land where days unclouded,
Purest joy, and perfect peace
Never cease.
—Come, Thou Bright and Morning Star (LSB 872:5)

## Prayer of the Day

O God and Ruler over all our foes of body and soul, You strengthened Your servants Perpetua and Felicitas, giving them a confident and clear confession in the face of roaring beasts. Grant that we who remember their faithful martyrdom may share in their blessed assurance of victory over all earthly and spiritual enemies and hold fast to the promise of everlasting life secured for us through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1154) Perpetua and Felicitas, Martyrs At the beginning of the third century, the Roman emperor Septimus Severus forbade conversions to Christianity. Among those disobeying that edict were Perpetua, a young noblewoman, and her maidservant Felicitas. Both were jailed at Carthage in North Africa along with three fellow Christians. During their imprisonment, Perpetua and Felicitas witnessed to their faith with such conviction that the officer in charge became a follower of Jesus. After making arrangements for the well-being of their children, Perpetua and Felicitas were executed on March 7, 203. Tradition holds that Perpetua showed mercy to her captors by falling on a sword because they could not bear to put her to death. The story of this martyrdom has been told ever since as an encouragement to persecuted Christians.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord XI 16–23
