# March 8

## Psalmody

1 Blessèd is the one who consid- | ers the poor!* In the day of trouble the LORD de- | livers him;
2 the LORD protects him and keeps him alive; he is called blessèd | in the land;* you do not give him up to the will of his | enemies.
7 All who hate me whisper together a- | bout me;* they imagine the | worst for me.
8 They say, “A deadly thing is poured | out on him;* he will not rise again from | where he lies.”
9 Even my close friend in whom I | trusted,* who ate my bread, has lifted his heel a- | gainst me.
10 But you, O LORD, be gra- | cious to me,* and raise me up, that I may re- | pay them!
11 By this I know that you de- | light in me:* my enemy will not shout in triumph | over me.
12 But you have upheld me because of my in- | tegrity,* and set me in your presence for- | ever.
13 Blessèd be the LORD, the God of | Israel,* from everlasting to everlasting! Amen and | Amen.
—Psalm 41:1–2, 7–13
Additional Psalm: Psalm 129

## Old Testament Reading: Job 41:1–20, 31–34

[The Lord Challenges Job]

1“Can you draw out Leviathan with a fishhook or press down his tongue with a cord? 2Can you put a rope in his nose or pierce his jaw with a hook? 3Will he make many pleas to you? Will he speak to you soft words? 4Will he make a covenant with you to take him for your servant forever? 5Will you play with him as with a bird, or will you put him on a leash for your girls? 6Will traders bargain over him? Will they divide him up among the merchants? 7Can you fill his skin with harpoons or his head with fishing spears? 8Lay your hands on him; remember the battle—you will not do it again! 9Behold, the hope of a man is false; he is laid low even at the sight of him. 10No one is so fierce that he dares to stir him up. Who then is he who can stand before me? 11Who has first given to me, that I should repay him? Whatever is under the whole heaven is mine. 12“I will not keep silence concerning his limbs, or his mighty strength, or his goodly frame. 13Who can strip off his outer garment? Who would come near him with a bridle? 14Who can open the doors of his face? Around his teeth is terror. 15His back is made of rows of shields, shut up closely as with a seal. 16One is so near to another that no air can come between them. 17They are joined one to another; they clasp each other and cannot be separated. 18His sneezings flash forth light, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the dawn. 19Out of his mouth go flaming torches; sparks of fire leap forth. 20Out of his nostrils comes forth smoke, as from a boiling pot and burning rushes.… 31He makes the deep boil like a pot; he makes the sea like a pot of ointment. 32Behind him he leaves a shining wake; one would think the deep to be white-haired. 33On earth there is not his like, a creature without fear. 34He sees everything that is high; he is king over all the sons of pride.”

## New Testament Reading: John 13:1–20

Jesus Washes the Disciples’ Feet

1Now before the Feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour had come to depart out of this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end. 2During supper, when the devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, to betray him, 3Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he had come from God and was going back to God, 4rose from supper. He laid aside his outer garments, and taking a towel, tied it around his waist. 5Then he poured water into a basin and began to wash the disciples’ feet and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around him. 6He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Lord, do you wash my feet?” 7Jesus answered him, “What I am doing you do not understand now, but afterward you will understand.” 8Peter said to him, “You shall never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him, “If I do not wash you, you have no share with me.” 9Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, not my feet only but also my hands and my head!” 10Jesus said to him, “The one who has bathed does not need to wash, except for his feet, but is completely clean. And you are clean, but not every one of you.” 11For he knew who was to betray him; that was why he said, “Not all of you are clean.” 12When he had washed their feet and put on his outer garments and resumed his place, he said to them, “Do you understand what I have done to you? 13You call me Teacher and Lord, and you are right, for so I am. 14If I then, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another’s feet. 15For I have given you an example, that you also should do just as I have done to you. 16Truly, truly, I say to you, a servant is not greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him. 17If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them. 18I am not speaking of all of you; I know whom I have chosen. But the Scripture will be fulfilled, ‘He who ate my bread has lifted his heel against me.’ 19I am telling you this now, before it takes place, that when it does take place you may believe that I am he. 20Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.”

## Writing

No other creature—neither man nor angel—can or shall say, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to Me” [Matthew 28:18]. For although God is in the saints with all the fullness of His Godhead that He has everywhere with Himself, He does not dwell in them bodily. Nor is He personally united with them as in Christ.… Christ says, even according to His human nature, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to Me” (Matthew 28:18). Also John 13:3 says, “Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into His hands.” Also Colossians 2:9 says, “For in Him the whole fullness of deity dwells bodily.” Also Scripture says, “You have crowned Him with glory and honor, putting everything in subjection under His feet. Now in putting everything in subjection to Him, He left nothing outside His control” (Hebrews 2:7–8[; see also Psalm 8:6]). “He is excepted who put all things in subjection under Him” (1 Corinthians 15:27).… God the Father has given His Spirit to Christ, His beloved Son, according to the received humanity. (Because of this He is called also Messiah; i.e., the Anointed.) He has not received His gifts with limits as other saints. For on Christ the Lord, according to His received human nature, rests “the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge ‹and the fear of the LORD” (Isaiah 11:2; see also Colossians 2:3; Isaiah 61:1›). (According to His divinity, He is of one essence with the Holy Spirit.) This not in such a way that, as a man, He knew and could do only some things, like other saints know and can do things by God’s Spirit, who works in them only created gifts. According to His divinity, Christ is the Second Person in the Holy Trinity. And from Him, as also from the Father, the Holy Spirit proceeds [John 15:26]. So the Spirit is and remains Christ’s [1 Peter 1:11] and the Father’s own Spirit to all eternity, not separated from God’s Son.
—Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VIII 70, 72–73

## Hymnody

Jesus gave to His disciples
   A commandment that was new:
“Show My love to one another,
   Do as I have done for you;
All the world will know you love Me
   As you love each other too.”
—Jesus, Greatest at the Table (LSB 446:5)

## Prayer of the Day

O Lord, in this wondrous Sacrament You have left us a remembrance of Your passion. Grant that we may so receive the sacred mystery of Your body and blood that the fruits of Your redemption may continually be manifest in us; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L32)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord [XII] 1–19

[1] In order that ‹heresies and sects› may not be pinned on us silently (for in the preceding explanation, we have made no mention of them), we intend at the end ‹of this writing› simply to make a list. The list will show the articles in which ‹the heretics of our time› err and teach contrary to our Christian faith and confession (to which we have often referred).

ERRONEOUS ARTICLES OF THE ANABAPTISTS

[2] The Anabaptists are divided among themselves into many factions, because one fights for more errors, another for less. However, they all in common profess the sort of doctrine that cannot be tolerated or allowed in the Church, in the commonwealth and secular government, or in home life.

Articles That Cannot Be Tolerated in the Church

[3] 1. Christ did not receive His body and blood from the Virgin Mary, but brought them with Him from heaven.

[4] 2. Christ is not true God, but ‹is only superior to other saints, because He› has more gifts of the Holy Spirit than any other holy man.

[5] 3. Our righteousness before God stands not on the sole merit of Christ alone, but in renewal, and therefore in our own godliness in which we walk. This is based in great part on one’s own special, self-chosen spirituality. In fact, it is nothing other than a new kind of monasticism.

[6] 4. Children who are not baptized are not sinners before God, but righteous and innocent. In their innocence, because they have not yet gained the use of their reason, children are saved without Baptism. According to their assertion, children do not need Baptism. Therefore, they reject the entire teaching about original sin and what belongs to it.

[7] 5. Children are not to be baptized until they have gained the use of their reason and can confess their faith themselves.

[8] 6. The children of Christians, because they have been born of Christian and believing parents, are holy and children of God even without and before Baptism. And for this reason they do not attach much importance to the Baptism of children or encourage it, contrary to the clear words of God’s promise, which applies only to those who keep His covenant and do not despise it (see Genesis 17:7–14[; also Acts 2:38–39 and Colossians 2:11–15]).

[9] 7. There is no true Christian congregation [church] in which sinners are still found.

[10] 8. No sermon is to be heard or attended in those church buildings [German: Tempeln] where formerly papal Masses have been celebrated and said.

[11] 9. ‹A godly person› must not have anything to do with the ministers of the Church who preach the Gospel according to the Augsburg Confession and rebuke the sermons and errors of the Anabaptists. Also, a person must not serve or in any way work for them, but must flee from them and shun them as perverters of God’s Word.

Articles That Cannot Be Tolerated in the Government

[12] 1. Under the New Testament, public office is not a calling that pleases God.

[13] 2. A Christian cannot with a good, clear conscience hold or fulfill public office.

[14] 3. In cases that require action, a Christian cannot use the office of the magistracy against the wicked without harming his conscience. For protection and defense, citizens may invoke the power that the magistrates possess and have received from God.

[15] 4. A Christian cannot take an oath with a good conscience. Nor can a Christian ‹promise loyalty› with an oath to the hereditary prince of his country or sovereign.

[16] 5. Under the New Testament public officials cannot, without injury to conscience, impose capital punishment on evildoers.

Articles That Cannot Be Tolerated in Domestic Life

[17] 1. A Christian cannot with a good conscience hold or possess property, but is in duty bound to devote his property to the common treasury.

[18] 2. A Christian cannot with a good conscience be an innkeeper, merchant, or maker of weapons.

[19] 3. Married people may be divorced on account of ‹differences in› faith. One may abandon the other and be married to another person who shares his faith.

ERRONEOUS ARTICLES OF THE SCHWENKFELDIANS
