# March 5

## Psalmody

22 The stone that the builders re- | jected* has become the | cornerstone.
23 This is the LORD’s | doing;* it is marvelous | in our eyes.
24 This is the day that the | LORD has made;* let us rejoice and be | glad in it.
25 Save us, we pray, | O LORD!* O LORD, we pray, give | us success!
26 Blessèd is he who comes in the name | of the LORD!* We bless you from the house | of the LORD.
27 The LORD is God, and he has made his light to shine up- | on us.* Bind the festal sacrifice with cords, up to the horns of the | altar!
28 You are my God, and I will give | thanks to you;* you are my God; I will ex- | tol you.
29 Oh give thanks to the LORD, for | he is good;* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever!
—Psalm 118:22–29
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:41–48

## Old Testament Reading: Job 37:1–24

Elihu Proclaims God’s Majesty

1“At this also my heart trembles and leaps out of its place. 2Keep listening to the thunder of his voice and the rumbling that comes from his mouth. 3Under the whole heaven he lets it go, and his lightning to the corners of the earth. 4After it his voice roars; he thunders with his majestic voice, and he does not restrain the lightnings when his voice is heard. 5God thunders wondrously with his voice; he does great things that we cannot comprehend. 6For to the snow he says, ‘Fall on the earth,’ likewise to the downpour, his mighty downpour. 7He seals up the hand of every man, that all men whom he made may know it. 8Then the beasts go into their lairs, and remain in their dens. 9From its chamber comes the whirlwind, and cold from the scattering winds. 10By the breath of God ice is given, and the broad waters are frozen fast. 11He loads the thick cloud with moisture; the clouds scatter his lightning. 12They turn around and around by his guidance, to accomplish all that he commands them on the face of the habitable world. 13Whether for correction or for his land or for love, he causes it to happen. 14“Hear this, O Job; stop and consider the wondrous works of God. 15Do you know how God lays his command upon them and causes the lightning of his cloud to shine? 16Do you know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him who is perfect in knowledge, 17you whose garments are hot when the earth is still because of the south wind? 18Can you, like him, spread out the skies, hard as a cast metal mirror? 19Teach us what we shall say to him; we cannot draw up our case because of darkness. 20Shall it be told him that I would speak? Did a man ever wish that he would be swallowed up? 21“And now no one looks on the light when it is bright in the skies, when the wind has passed and cleared them. 22Out of the north comes golden splendor; God is clothed with awesome majesty. 23The Almighty—we cannot find him; he is great in power; justice and abundant righteousness he will not violate. 24Therefore men fear him; he does not regard any who are wise in their own conceit.”

## New Testament Reading: John 12:1–19

Mary Anoints Jesus at Bethany

1Six days before the Passover, Jesus therefore came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. 2So they gave a dinner for him there. Martha served, and Lazarus was one of those reclining with him at table. 3Mary therefore took a pound of expensive ointment made from pure nard, and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume. 4But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples (he who was about to betray him), said, 5“Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor?” 6He said this, not because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief, and having charge of the moneybag he used to help himself to what was put into it. 7Jesus said, “Leave her alone, so that she may keep it for the day of my burial. 8For the poor you always have with you, but you do not always have me.”

The Plot to Kill Lazarus

9When the large crowd of the Jews learned that Jesus was there, they came, not only on account of him but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. 10So the chief priests made plans to put Lazarus to death as well, 11because on account of him many of the Jews were going away and believing in Jesus.

The Triumphal Entry

12The next day the large crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem. 13So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, crying out, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, even the King of Israel!” 14And Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, just as it is written, 15“Fear not, daughter of Zion; behold, your king is coming, sitting on a donkey’s colt!” 16His disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things had been written about him and had been done to him. 17The crowd that had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to bear witness. 18The reason why the crowd went to meet him was that they heard he had done this sign. 19So the Pharisees said to one another, “You see that you are gaining nothing. Look, the world has gone after him.”

## Writing

Whoever wants to belong to the one, invisible Church must be an upright Christian, striving with great earnestness to do what God has commanded and to leave undone what He has forbidden. Such a person also has the holy duty to belong, where he can, to an orthodox visible church because this, too, is a clear command of God. According to God’s Word, a person should not only have the right faith in his heart, but he should also confess it with his mouth and his deeds. Therefore, whoever wants to belong to the true invisible Church also joins with those who confess the faith of this Church.… No one who wants to be saved is free to remain alone, to separate himself from the multitude of other confessors of the truth, and to keep the divine service only for himself. Instead, each person is bound to keep himself where the Word is preached in an open and orderly manner. As David testifies, “I hate the assembly of evildoers.… I wash my hands in innocence and go around Your altar, O LORD, proclaiming thanksgiving aloud, and telling all Your wondrous deeds” (Psalm 26:5–7). Christ says, “And if he refuses to listen even to the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax collector” (Matthew 18:17). When the apostles converted 3,000 souls on the first Pentecost, the Book of Acts reports that “they devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread and the prayers” (2:42). Later, when those zealous for the faith wanted to go out, the apostles cautioned, “[Do] not [neglect] to meet together, as is the habit of some” (Hebrews 10:25). And as Paul exhorts in [1 Corinthians 1:10], believers should tolerate “no divisions among you,” but instead should be “united in the same mind and the same judgment.”
—C. F. W. Walther

## Hymnody

Ride on, ride on in majesty!
In lowly pomp ride on to die.
O Christ, Thy triumphs now begin
O’er captive death and conquered sin.
—Ride On, Ride On in Majesty (LSB 441:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, grant that in the midst of our failures and weaknesses we may be restored through the passion and intercession of Your only-begotten Son, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L29)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord IX–X

## IX. THE DESCENT OF CHRIST TO HELL

## STATUS OF THE CONTROVERSY

THE CHIEF CONTROVERSY ABOUT THIS ARTICLE

[1] This article has also been disputed among some theologians who have subscribed to the Augsburg Confession: When and in what manner did the Lord Christ, according to our simple Christian faith, descend to hell? Was this done before or after His death? Did this happen only to His soul, only to the divinity, or with body and soul, spiritually or bodily? Does this article belong to Christ’s passion or to His glorious victory and triumph?

[2] This article, like the preceding article, cannot be grasped by the senses or by our reason. It must be grasped through faith alone. Therefore, it is our unanimous opinion that there should be no dispute over it. It should be believed and taught only in the simplest way.

[3] Teach it like Dr. Luther, of blessed memory, in his sermon at Torgau in the year 1533 [WA 37:62–67]. He has explained this article in a completely Christian way. He separated all useless, unnecessary questions from it, and encouraged all godly Christians to believe with Christian simplicity.

[4] It is enough if we know that Christ descended into hell, destroyed hell for all believers, and delivered them from the power of death and of the devil, from eternal condemnation and the jaws of hell. We will save our questions ‹and not curiously investigate› about how this happened until the other world. Then not only this ‹mystery›, but others also will be revealed that we simply believe here and cannot grasp with our blind reason.

## X. CHURCH PRACTICES

WHICH ARE CALLED ADIAPHORA OR MATTERS OF INDIFFERENCE

(See also AC XIV; AC XXIV; AC XXVI; AC XXVIII; Ap XIV; Ap XV; Ap XXIV; Ap XXVIII; SA III XV; FC SD X.)

[1] A disagreement has also arisen among the theologians of the Augsburg Confession about ceremonies or Church rites that are neither commanded nor forbidden in God’s Word, but have been introduced into the Church for the sake of good order and fitting use.

## STATUS OF THE CONTROVERSY

THE CHIEF CONTROVERSY ABOUT THIS ARTICLE

[2] The chief question has been about a time of persecution and a matter of confession, even when the enemies of the Gospel have not reached an agreement with us in doctrine. Can some abolished ceremonies (which in themselves are matters of indifference and are neither commanded nor forbidden by God) be re-established by the pressure and demand of the adversaries without harming our conscience? May we compromise with them in such ceremonies and adiaphora? To this question one side has said Yes; the other, No.

AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENTS

The Correct and True Teaching and Confession about This Article

[3] 1. For settling this controversy, we unanimously believe, teach, and confess that some ceremonies or Church practices are neither commanded nor forbidden in God’s Word, but have been introduced only for the sake of fitting and good order. Such rites are not in and of themselves divine worship. They are not even a part of it. Matthew 15:9 says, “In vain do they worship Me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.”

[4] 2. We believe, teach, and confess that the community of God ‹the churches of God› (in every place ‹in every land› and at every time according to its circumstances) has the power to change such worship ceremonies in a way that may be most useful and edifying to the community of God ‹the churches of God›.

[5] 3. Nevertheless, all frivolity and offense should be avoided in this matter. Special care should be taken to exercise patience toward the weak in faith (1 Corinthians 8:9; Romans 14:13).

[6] 4. We believe, teach, and confess that during a time of persecution, when a plain ‹and steadfast› confession is required of us, we should not yield to the enemies in such matters of adiaphora. For the apostle has written in Galatians 5:1, “For freedom Christ has set us free; stand firm therefore, and do not submit again to a yoke of slavery.” He also writes in 2 Corinthians 6:14, “Do not be unequally yoked with unbelievers. For what partnership has righteousness with lawlessness? Or what fellowship has light with darkness?” Also note Galatians 2:5, “To them we did not yield in submission even for a moment, so that the truth of the gospel might be preserved for you.” For in such a case it is no longer a question about adiaphora. But it concerns the truth of the Gospel, [preserving] Christian liberty, and sanctioning open idolatry. It also concerns the prevention of offense to the weak in the faith. In such a case we have nothing to concede. We should plainly confess and endure what God sends because of that confession, and whatever He allows the enemies of His Word to inflict on us.

[7] 5. We believe, teach, and confess also that no church should condemn another because one has less or more outward ceremonies than the other, for those are not commanded by God. This is true as long as they have unity with one another in the doctrine and all its articles and in the right use of the holy Sacraments. This practice follows the well-known saying “Disagreement in fasting does not destroy agreement in faith.”

## NEGATIVE STATEMENTS

False Teaching about This Article

[8] We reject and condemn as wrong and contrary to God’s Word when the following are taught:

[9] 1. Human ordinances and institutions in the Church should be regarded as a divine worship in themselves or part of it.

[10] 2. When such ceremonies, ordinances, and institutions are violently forced on the community of God ‹the churches of God› as necessary, contrary to its Christian freedom, which it has in outward things.

[11] 3. In a time of persecution and public confession, ‹when a clear confession is required› we may yield to the enemies of the Gospel in such adiaphora and ceremonies or compromise with them ‹which damages the truth›.

[12] 4. When these outward ceremonies and adiaphora are abolished as though the community of God ‹the churches of God› were not free to use one or more ceremonies in Christian freedom, according to its circumstances, as may be most useful at any time for the Church ‹for edification›.
