# March 3

## Psalmody

12 What shall I render | to the LORD* for all his bene- | fits to me?
13 I will lift up the cup of sal- | vation* and call on the name | of the LORD,
14 I will pay my vows | to the LORD* in the presence of all his | people.
15 Precious in the sight | of the LORD* is the death | of his saints.
16 O LORD, I am your | servant;* I am your servant, the son of your maidservant. You have | loosed my bonds.
17 I will offer to you the sacrifice of thanks- | giving* and call on the name | of the LORD.
18 I will pay my vows | to the LORD* in the presence of all his | people,
19 in the courts of the house | of the LORD,* in your midst, O Jerusalem. | Praise the LORD!
—Psalm 116:12–19
Additional Psalm: Psalm 138

## Old Testament Reading: Job 34:10–33

[Elihu Asserts God’s Justice]

10“Therefore, hear me, you men of understanding: far be it from God that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty that he should do wrong. 11For according to the work of a man he will repay him, and according to his ways he will make it befall him. 12Of a truth, God will not do wickedly, and the Almighty will not pervert justice. 13Who gave him charge over the earth, and who laid on him the whole world? 14If he should set his heart to it and gather to himself his spirit and his breath, 15all flesh would perish together, and man would return to dust. 16“If you have understanding, hear this; listen to what I say. 17Shall one who hates justice govern? Will you condemn him who is righteous and mighty, 18who says to a king, ‘Worthless one,’ and to nobles, ‘Wicked man,’ 19who shows no partiality to princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor, for they are all the work of his hands? 20In a moment they die; at midnight the people are shaken and pass away, and the mighty are taken away by no human hand. 21“For his eyes are on the ways of a man, and he sees all his steps. 22There is no gloom or deep darkness where evildoers may hide themselves. 23For God has no need to consider a man further, that he should go before God in judgment. 24He shatters the mighty without investigation and sets others in their place. 25Thus, knowing their works, he overturns them in the night, and they are crushed. 26He strikes them for their wickedness in a place for all to see, 27because they turned aside from following him and had no regard for any of his ways, 28so that they caused the cry of the poor to come to him, and he heard the cry of the afflicted—29When he is quiet, who can condemn? When he hides his face, who can behold him, whether it be a nation or a man?—30that a godless man should not reign, that he should not ensnare the people. 31“For has anyone said to God, ‘I have borne punishment; I will not offend any more; 32teach me what I do not see; if I have done iniquity, I will do it no more’? 33Will he then make repayment to suit you, because you reject it? For you must choose, and not I; therefore declare what you know.”

## New Testament Reading: John 11:17–37

I Am the Resurrection and the Life

17Now when Jesus came, he found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb four days. 18Bethany was near Jerusalem, about two miles off, 19and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them concerning their brother. 20So when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went and met him, but Mary remained seated in the house. 21Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died. 22But even now I know that whatever you ask from God, God will give you.” 23Jesus said to her, “Your brother will rise again.” 24Martha said to him, “I know that he will rise again in the resurrection on the last day.” 25Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. Whoever believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live, 26and everyone who lives and believes in me shall never die. Do you believe this?” 27She said to him, “Yes, Lord; I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who is coming into the world.”

Jesus Weeps

28When she had said this, she went and called her sister Mary, saying in private, “The Teacher is here and is calling for you.” 29And when she heard it, she rose quickly and went to him. 30Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was still in the place where Martha had met him. 31When the Jews who were with her in the house, consoling her, saw Mary rise quickly and go out, they followed her, supposing that she was going to the tomb to weep there. 32Now when Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet, saying to him, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.” 33When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in his spirit and greatly troubled. 34And he said, “Where have you laid him?” They said to him, “Lord, come and see.” 35Jesus wept. 36So the Jews said, “See how he loved him!” 37But some of them said, “Could not he who opened the eyes of the blind man also have kept this man from dying?”

## Writing

John adds this point also: “In Him was life, and the life was the light of men” (John 1:4). Therefore, this person of the Deity in whom was the life and light of men, even before the Fall, was sent for the work of our redemption. For when we were alienated from the life of God through the Fall (Eph. 4:18), and when death through sin had come upon all men (Rom. 5:12), we could not be rescued from death and restored to life except through Him in whom was life, who was the very Word of life and life itself (1 John 1:1–2); and this has made sure our faith that truly and powerfully we are freed from death through Christ and led to eternal life, because in Him was life, for He is life itself. Therefore, he who believes in Him, though he were dead, shall live (John 11:25). And he who has the Son has eternal life; for life itself is in the Son (1 John 5:11). These points, when piously considered, are full of comfort.
—Martin Chemnitz

## Hymnody

Jesus has come as the mighty Redeemer.
   See now the threatening strong one disarmed!
Jesus breaks down all the walls of death’s fortress,
   Brings forth the pris’ners triumphant, unharmed.
Satan, you wicked one, own now your master!
Jesus has come! He, the mighty Redeemer!
—Jesus Has Come and Brings Pleasure (LSB 533:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, by Your great goodness mercifully look upon Your people that we may be governed and preserved evermore in body and soul; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L27)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord VIII 10–18

[10] 6. We believe, teach, and confess that God is man and man is God. This could not be true if the divine and human natures had (in deed and truth) absolutely no communion with each other.

[11] For how could the man, the Son of Mary, in truth be called or be God, or the Son of God the Most High, if His humanity were not personally united with the Son of God? How could He have no real communion (that is, in deed and truth) with the Most High, but only share God’s name?

[12] 7. So we believe, teach, and confess that Mary conceived and bore not merely a man and no more, but God’s true Son. Therefore, she also is rightly called and truly is “the mother of God.”

[13] 8. We also believe, teach, and confess that it was not a mere man who suffered, died, was buried, descended to hell, rose from the dead, ascended into heaven, and was raised to God’s majesty and almighty power for us. But it was a man whose human nature has such a profound ‹close›, indescribable union and communion with God’s Son that it is one person with Him.

[14] 9. God’s Son truly suffered for us. However, He did so according to the attributes of the human nature, which He received into the unity of His divine person and made His own. He did this so that He might be able to suffer and be our High Priest for our reconciliation with God, as it is written in 1 Corinthians 2:8, they “crucified the Lord of glory.” And Acts 20:28 says, with God’s blood we have been redeemed.

[15] 10. We believe, teach, and confess that the Son of Man really is exalted. He is (in deed and truth) exalted according to His human nature to the right hand of God’s almighty majesty and power. For He was received into God when He was conceived of the Holy Spirit in His mother’s womb, and His human nature was personally united with the Son of the Highest.

[16] 11. Christ always had this majesty according to the personal union. Yet He abstained from using it in the state of His humiliation, and because of this He truly increased in all wisdom and favor with God and men. Therefore, He did not always use this majesty, but only when it pleased Him. Then, after His resurrection, He entirely laid aside the form of a servant, but not the human nature, and was established in the full use, manifestation, and declaration of the divine majesty. In this way He entered into His glory [Philippians 2:6–11]. So now not just as God, but also as man He knows all things and can do all things. He is present with all creatures, and has under His feet and in His hands everything that is in heaven and on earth and under the earth, as He Himself testifies [in Matthew 28:18], “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to Me” [see also John 13:3]. And St. Paul says in Ephesians 4:10, “He . . . ascended far above all the heavens, that He might fill all things.” Because He is present, He can exercise His power everywhere. To Him everything is possible and everything is known.

[17] 12. Christ may give His true body and blood in the Holy Supper, as one who is present—and it is very easy for Him to do so. He does not do this according to the mode or ability of the human nature, but according to the mode and ability of God’s right hand. Dr. Luther says this in accordance with our Christian faith [as we teach it to] children: this presence ‹of Christ in the Holy Supper› is not ‹physical or› earthly, nor Capernaitic; yet it is true and substantial, as the words of His testament read, “This is, is, is My body,” and so on.

[18] Our doctrine, faith, and confession about the person of Christ is not divided, as it was by Nestorius. He denied the true communion of the properties of both natures in Christ (communicatio idiomatum). So he divided the person, as Luther has explained in his book Concerning Councils [LW 41:95–106]. The natures, together with their properties, are not mixed with each other into one essence (as Eutyches erred). The human nature in the person of Christ is not denied or annihilated. Nor is either nature changed into the other. Christ is and remains to all eternity God and man in one undivided person. Next to the Holy Trinity, this is the highest mystery, upon which our only consolation, life, and salvation depends, as the apostle testifies in 1 Timothy 3:16.

NEGATIVE STATEMENTS

Contrary False Doctrine about the Person of Christ
