# March 1

## Psalmody

1 God has taken his place in the divine | council;* in the midst of the gods he holds | judgment:
2 “How long will you judge un- | justly* and show partiality to the | wicked?
3 Give justice to the weak and the | fatherless;* maintain the right of the afflicted and the | destitute.
4 Rescue the weak and the | needy;* deliver them from the hand of the | wicked.”
5 They have neither knowledge nor understanding, they walk about in | darkness;* all the foundations of the earth are | shaken.
6 I said, | “You are gods,* sons of the Most High, | all of you;
7 nevertheless, like men | you shall die,* and fall like | any prince.”
8 Arise, O God, | judge the earth;* for you shall inherit all the | nations!
—Psalm 82
Additional Psalm: Psalm 140

## Old Testament Reading: Job 33:1–18

Elihu Rebukes Job

1“But now, hear my speech, O Job, and listen to all my words. 2Behold, I open my mouth; the tongue in my mouth speaks. 3My words declare the uprightness of my heart, and what my lips know they speak sincerely. 4The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty gives me life. 5Answer me, if you can; set your words in order before me; take your stand. 6Behold, I am toward God as you are; I too was pinched off from a piece of clay. 7Behold, no fear of me need terrify you; my pressure will not be heavy upon you. 8“Surely you have spoken in my ears, and I have heard the sound of your words. 9You say, ‘I am pure, without transgression; I am clean, and there is no iniquity in me. 10Behold, he finds occasions against me, he counts me as his enemy, 11he puts my feet in the stocks and watches all my paths.’ 12“Behold, in this you are not right. I will answer you, for God is greater than man. 13Why do you contend against him, saying, ‘He will answer none of man’s words’? 14For God speaks in one way, and in two, though man does not perceive it. 15In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls on men, while they slumber on their beds, 16then he opens the ears of men and terrifies them with warnings, 17that he may turn man aside from his deed and conceal pride from a man; 18he keeps back his soul from the pit, his life from perishing by the sword.”

## New Testament Reading: John 10:22–42

I and the Father Are One

22At that time the Feast of Dedication took place at Jerusalem. It was winter, 23and Jesus was walking in the temple, in the colonnade of Solomon. 24So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, “How long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.” 25Jesus answered them, “I told you, and you do not believe. The works that I do in my Father’s name bear witness about me, 26but you do not believe because you are not part of my flock. 27My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. 28I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand. 29My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father’s hand. 30I and the Father are one.” 31The Jews picked up stones again to stone him. 32Jesus answered them, “I have shown you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you going to stone me?” 33The Jews answered him, “It is not for a good work that we are going to stone you but for blasphemy, because you, being a man, make yourself God.” 34Jesus answered them, “Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said, you are gods’? 35If he called them gods to whom the word of God came—and Scripture cannot be broken—36do you say of him whom the Father consecrated and sent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’? 37If I am not doing the works of my Father, then do not believe me; 38but if I do them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works, that you may know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.” 39Again they sought to arrest him, but he escaped from their hands. 40He went away again across the Jordan to the place where John had been baptizing at first, and there he remained. 41And many came to him. And they said, “John did no sign, but everything that John said about this man was true.” 42And many believed in him there.

## Writing

The sages, it is often said, can see no answer to the riddle of religion. But the trouble with our sages is not that they cannot see the answer; it is that they cannot even see the riddle. They are like children so stupid as to notice nothing paradoxical in the playful assertion that a door is not a door. The modern latitudinarians speak, for instance, about authority in religion not only as if there were no reason in it, but as if there had never been any reason for it. Apart from seeing its philosophical basis, they cannot even see its historical cause. Religious authority has often, doubtless, been oppressive or unreasonable; just as every legal system (and especially our present one) has been callous and full of a cruel apathy. It is rational to attack the police; nay, it is glorious. But the modern critics of religious authority are like men who should attack the police without ever having heard of burglars. For there is a great and possible peril to the human mind: a peril as practical as burglary. Against it religious authority was reared, rightly or wrongly, as a barrier. And against it something certainly must be reared as a barrier, if our race is to avoid ruin.
—Gilbert K. Chesterton

## Hymnody

Thine forever! Shepherd, keep
These Thy frail and trembling sheep;
Safe alone beneath Thy care,
Let us all Thy goodness share.
—Thine Forever, God of Love (LSB 687:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and ever-living God, You fulfilled Your promise by sending the gift of the Holy Spirit to unite disciples of all nations in the cross and resurrection of Your Son, Jesus Christ. By the preaching of the Gospel spread this gift to the ends of the earth; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L49)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord VII 21–42

[21] On the other hand, we unanimously reject and condemn all the following erroneous articles. They are opposed and contrary to the teaching presented above, the simple faith, and the ‹pure› confession about the Lord’s Supper.

[22] 1. The papistic transubstantiation. It is taught in the papacy that during the Holy Supper the bread and wine lose their substance and natural essence, and that they are annihilated. They say they are changed into Christ’s body, and only the outward form remains.

[23] 2. The papistic sacrifice of the Mass for the sins of the living and the dead.

[24] 3. That ‹the Sacrilege› to laypeople only one form of the Sacrament is given. Contrary to the plain words of Christ’s testament, the cup is withheld from them. They are robbed of His blood.

[25] 4. The teaching that the words of Christ’s testament must not be understood or believed simply as they read, but that His words are difficult expressions, whose meaning must be sought first in other passages of Scripture.

[26] 5. In the Holy Supper Christ’s body is not received orally with the bread. But with the mouth only bread and wine are received. Christ’s body, however, is only received spiritually through faith.

[27] 6. The bread and wine in the Holy Supper are nothing more than ‹symbols or› tokens by which Christians recognize one another.

[28] 7. The bread and wine are only figures, points of comparison, and representations of Christ’s far absent body and blood.

[29] 8. The bread and wine are no more than a memorial, seal, and pledge. We are assured through them that when faith elevates itself to heaven, it becomes a partaker of Christ’s body and blood there. This happens as surely as we eat bread and drink wine in the Supper.

[30] 9. In the Holy Supper the assurance and confirmation of our faith ‹concerning salvation› happen through the external signs of bread and wine alone. They do not happen through Christ’s actually ‹truly› present body and blood.

[31] 10. In the Holy Supper only the power, effect, and merit of Christ’s absent body and blood are distributed.

[32] 11. Christ’s body is so enclosed in heaven that there is no way it can be at once and at one time in many or all places on earth where His Holy Supper is celebrated.

[33] 12. Christ has not promised and could not have caused the essential presence of His body and blood in the Holy Supper. For the nature and the property of the human nature He received cannot allow this presence or permit it.

[34] 13. God, by all His power, is not able (which is dreadful to hear) to cause His body to be essentially present in more than one place at one time.

[35] 14. Not the all-powerful words of Christ’s testament, but faith, produces and makes Christ’s body and blood present in the Holy Supper.

[36] 15. Believers must not seek Christ’s body ‹and blood› in the bread and wine of the Holy Supper. They must raise their eyes from the bread to heaven and there seek Christ’s body.

[37] 16. Unbelieving, unrepentant Christians do not receive Christ’s true body and blood in the Holy Supper, but only bread and wine.

[38] 17. At this heavenly meal the worthiness of the guests comes not only from true faith in Christ, but also from people’s outward preparation.

[39] 18. Even the true believers, who have and hold a true, living, pure faith in Christ, can receive this Sacrament to their judgment. For they are still imperfect in their outward life.

[40] 19. The external visible elements of the bread and wine should be adored in the Holy Sacrament.

[41] 20. Likewise, we also hand over all proud, frivolous, blasphemous questions (which decency forbids us to mention), and other expressions to God’s just judgment. Most blasphemously and with great offense ‹to the Church› such things are proposed by the Sacramentarians in a crass, carnal, Capernaitic way about the supernatural, heavenly mysteries of this Sacrament.

[42] 21. We utterly ‹reject and› condemn the Capernaitic eating of Christ’s body, as though ‹we taught that› His flesh were torn with the teeth and digested like other food. The Sacramentarians—against the testimony of their conscience, after all our frequent protests—willfully label us with this view. In this way they make our teaching hateful to their hearers. On the other hand, we hold and believe, according to the simple words of Christ’s testament, the true, yet supernatural eating of Christ’s body and also the drinking of His blood. Human senses and reason do not comprehend. But, as in all other articles of faith, our reason is brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ [2 Corinthians 10:5]. This mystery is not grasped in any other way than through faith alone, and it is revealed in the Word alone.
