# March 9

## Psalmody

11 Teach me your way, O LORD, that I may walk | in your truth;* unite my heart to | fear your name.
12 I give thanks to you, O Lord my God, with | my whole heart,* and I will glorify your name for- | ever.
13 For great is your steadfast | love toward me;* you have delivered my soul from the depths | of Sheol.
14 O God, insolent men have risen up against me; a band of ruthless men | seek my life,* and they do not set you be- | fore them.
15 But you, O Lord, are a God merciful and | gracious,* slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love and | faithfulness.
16 Turn to me and be gra- | cious to me;* give your strength to your servant, and save the son of your maid- | servant.
17 Show me a sign of your | favor,* that those who hate me may see and be put to shame because you, LORD, have helped me and com- | forted me.
—Psalm 86:11–17
Additional Psalm: Psalm 136

## Old Testament Reading: Job 42:1–17

Job’s Confession and Repentance

1Then Job answered the Lord and said: 2“I know that you can do all things, and that no purpose of yours can be thwarted. 3‘Who is this that hides counsel without knowledge?’ Therefore I have uttered what I did not understand, things too wonderful for me, which I did not know. 4‘Hear, and I will speak; I will question you, and you make it known to me.’ 5I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees you; 6therefore I despise myself, and repent in dust and ashes.”

The LORD Rebukes Job’s Friends

7After the LORD had spoken these words to Job, the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite: “My anger burns against you and against your two friends, for you have not spoken of me what is right, as my servant Job has. 8Now therefore take seven bulls and seven rams and go to my servant Job and offer up a burnt offering for yourselves. And my servant Job shall pray for you, for I will accept his prayer not to deal with you according to your folly. For you have not spoken of me what is right, as my servant Job has.” 9So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went and did what the LORD had told them, and the LORD accepted Job’s prayer.

The LORD Restores Job’s Fortunes

10And the LORD restored the fortunes of Job, when he had prayed for his friends. And the LORD gave Job twice as much as he had before. 11Then came to him all his brothers and sisters and all who had known him before, and ate bread with him in his house. And they showed him sympathy and comforted him for all the evil that the LORD had brought upon him. And each of them gave him a piece of money and a ring of gold. 12And the LORD blessed the latter days of Job more than his beginning. And he had 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, 1,000 yoke of oxen, and 1,000 female donkeys. 13He had also seven sons and three daughters. 14And he called the name of the first daughter Jemimah, and the name of the second Keziah, and the name of the third Keren-happuch. 15And in all the land there were no women so beautiful as Job’s daughters. And their father gave them an inheritance among their brothers. 16And after this Job lived 140 years, and saw his sons, and his sons’ sons, four generations. 17And Job died, an old man, and full of days.

## New Testament Reading: John 13:21–38

One of You Will Betray Me

21After saying these things, Jesus was troubled in his spirit, and testified, “Truly, truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me.” 22The disciples looked at one another, uncertain of whom he spoke. 23One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was reclining at table close to Jesus, 24so Simon Peter motioned to him to ask Jesus of whom he was speaking. 25So that disciple, leaning back against Jesus, said to him, “Lord, who is it?” 26Jesus answered, “It is he to whom I will give this morsel of bread when I have dipped it.” So when he had dipped the morsel, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. 27Then after he had taken the morsel, Satan entered into him. Jesus said to him, “What you are going to do, do quickly.” 28Now no one at the table knew why he said this to him. 29Some thought that, because Judas had the moneybag, Jesus was telling him, “Buy what we need for the feast,” or that he should give something to the poor. 30So, after receiving the morsel of bread, he immediately went out. And it was night.

A New Commandment

31When he had gone out, Jesus said, “Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him. 32If God is glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and glorify him at once. 33Little children, yet a little while I am with you. You will seek me, and just as I said to the Jews, so now I also say to you, ‘Where I am going you cannot come.’ 34A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another: just as I have loved you, you also are to love one another. 35By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”

Jesus Foretells Peter’s Denial

36Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus answered him, “Where I am going you cannot follow me now, but you will follow afterward.” 37Peter said to him, “Lord, why can I not follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.” 38Jesus answered, “Will you lay down your life for me? Truly, truly, I say to you, the rooster will not crow till you have denied me three times.”

## Writing

But to what purpose is all this but that Job might understand (for this instruction was divinely inspired into him, that he might foreknow Christ’s coming to suffer)? That he might understand how patiently he ought to endure all that he went through, since Christ, though when He became man for us was absolutely without sin and though as God He possessed great power, did not refuse to obey, even to the suffering of death? When Job understood this with a purer intensity of heart, he added to his own answer these words: “I used before now to hear of You by the hearing of the ear; but behold now my eye sees You; therefore I abhor myself and melt away and account myself but dust and ashes.” Why was he thus so deeply displeased with himself? God’s work, in that he was man, could not rightly have given him displeasure, since it is even said to God Himself, “Do not despise the work of Your own hands.” It was indeed in view of that righteousness, in which he had discovered his own unrighteousness, that he abhorred himself and melted away and deemed himself dust and ashes—beholding, as he did in his mind, the righteousness of Christ, in whom there could not possibly be any sin, not only in respect of His divinity but also of His soul and His flesh. It was also in view of this righteousness which is of God that the apostle Paul, though as “touching the righteousness which is of the law he was blameless,” yet “counted all things” not only as loss but even as dung.
—Augustine of Hippo

## Hymnody

Break down the wall that would divide
Thy children, Lord, on ev’ry side.
My neighbor’s good let me pursue;
Let Christian love bind warm and true.
—Lord of All Nations, Grant Me Grace (LSB 844:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful and everlasting God, You did not spare Your only Son but delivered Him up for us all to bear our sins on the cross. Grant that our hearts may be so fixed with steadfast faith in Him that we fear not the power of sin, death, and the devil; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L31)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Epitome of the Formula of Concord [XII] 20–31
