# May 18

## Psalmody

6Give ear, O LORD, | to my prayer;* listen to my | plea for grace. 7In the day of my trouble I call up- | on you,* for you | answer me. 8There is none like you among the gods, | O Lord,* nor are there any | works like yours. 9All the nations you have made shall come and worship before you, | O Lord,* and shall glori- | fy your name. 10For you are great and do | wondrous things;* you a- | lone are God. 11Teach me your way, O LORD, that I may walk | in your truth;* unite my heart to | fear your name. 12I give thanks to you, O Lord my God, with | my whole heart,* and I will glorify your name for- | ever. 13For great is your steadfast | love toward me;* you have delivered my soul from the depths | of Sheol.—Psalm 86:6–13
Additional Psalm: Psalm 86

## Old Testament Reading: Song of Solomon 1:1–2:7

1The Song of Songs, which is Solomon’s.

The Bride Confesses Her Love Bride

2Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth! For your love is better than wine; 3your anointing oils are fragrant; your name is oil poured out; therefore virgins love you. 4Draw me after you; let us run. The king has brought me into his chambers. Chorus of Women We will exult and rejoice in you; we will extol your love more than wine; rightly do they love you.

Bride

5I am very dark, but lovely, O daughters of Jerusalem, like the tents of Kedar, like the curtains of Solomon. 6Do not gaze at me because I am dark, because the sun has looked upon me. My mother’s sons were angry with me; they made me keeper of the vineyards, but my own vineyard I have not kept! 7Tell me, you whom my soul loves, where you pasture your flock, where you make it lie down at noon; for why should I be like one who veils herself beside the flocks of your companions? Solomon and His Bride Delight in Each Other

Groom

8If you do not know, O most beautiful among women, follow in the tracks of the flock, and pasture your young goats beside the shepherds—tents. 9I compare you, my love, to a mare among Pharaoh’s chariots. 10Your cheeks are lovely with ornaments, your neck with strings of jewels.

Chorus of Women

11We will make for you ornaments of gold, studded with silver.

Bride

12While the king was on his couch, my nard gave forth its fragrance. 13My beloved is to me a sachet of myrrh that lies between my breasts. 14My beloved is to me a cluster of henna blossoms in the vineyards of Engedi.

Groom

15Behold, you are beautiful, my love; behold, you are beautiful; your eyes are doves.

Bride

16Behold, you are beautiful, my beloved, truly delightful. Our couch is green; 17the beams of our house are cedar; our rafters are pine. 2:1I am a rose of Sharon, a lily of the valleys.

Groom

2As a lily among brambles, so is my love among the young women.

Bride

3As an apple tree among the trees of the forest, so is my beloved among the young men. With great delight I sat in his shadow, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. 4He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love. 5Sustain me with raisins; refresh me with apples, for I am sick with love. 6His left hand is under my head, and his right hand embraces me! 7I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the gazelles or the does of the field, that you not stir up or awaken love until it pleases.

## New Testament Reading: John 5:1–18

The Healing at the Pool on the Sabbath

1After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2Now there is in Jerusalem by the Sheep Gate a pool, in Aramaic called Bethesda, which has five roofed colonnades. 3In these lay a multitude of invalids—blind, lame, and paralyzed. 5One man was there who had been an invalid for thirty-eight years. 6When Jesus saw him lying there and knew that he had already been there a long time, he said to him, “Do you want to be healed?” 7The sick man answered him, “Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, and while I am going another steps down before me.” 8Jesus said to him, “Get up, take up your bed, and walk.” 9And at once the man was healed, and he took up his bed and walked. Now that day was the Sabbath. 10So the Jews said to the man who had been healed, “It is the Sabbath, and it is not lawful for you to take up your bed.” 11But he answered them, “The man who healed me, that man said to me, ‘Take up your bed, and walk.’” 12They asked him, “Who is the man who said to you, ‘Take up your bed and walk’?” 13Now the man who had been healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn, as there was a crowd in the place. 14Afterward Jesus found him in the temple and said to him, “See, you are well! Sin no more, that nothing worse may happen to you.” 15The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had healed him. 16And this was why the Jews were persecuting Jesus, because he was doing these things on the Sabbath. 17But Jesus answered them, “My Father is working until now, and I am working.”

Jesus Is Equal with God

18This was why the Jews were seeking all the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God.

## Writing

It is a great error for anyone to think that it is by the authority of the Church that we observe the Lord’s Day as something necessary, instead of the Sabbath Day. Scripture itself has abolished the Sabbath Day [Colossians 2:16–17]. It teaches that since the Gospel has been revealed, all the ceremonies of Moses can be omitted. Yet, because it was necessary to appoint a certain day for the people to know when they ought to come together, it appears that the Church designated the Lord’s Day [Revelation 1:10] for this purpose. This day seems to have been chosen all the more for this additional reason: so people might have an example of Christian freedom and might know that keeping neither the Sabbath nor any other day is necessary. There are monstrous debates about changing the law, ceremonies of the new law, and changing the Sabbath Day. They have all sprung from the false belief that in the Church there must be something similar to the services set forth in Leviticus [1–7], and that Christ had commissioned the apostles and bishops to come up with new ceremonies necessary to salvation. These errors crept into the Church when the righteousness that comes through faith was not taught clearly enough. Some debate whether or not keeping the Lord’s Day is not a divine right, but similar to it. They prescribe the extent to which it is lawful to work on holy days. What else are such disputes except traps for the conscience? Even when they try to modify the traditions, nobody will understand the modifications as long as the opinion remains that these traditions are necessary and must remain. There the righteousness of faith and Christian freedom is not known.
—Augsburg Confession XXVIII 58–64

## Hymnody

This day at earth’s creation The light first had its birth;
This day for our salvation Christ rose from depths of earth;
This day our Lord victorious The Spirit sent from heav‘n,
And thus this day most glorious A threefold light was giv‘n.—O Day of
Rest and Gladness (LSB 906:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, the giver of all that is good, by Your holy inspiration grant that we may think those things that are right and by Your merciful guiding accomplish them; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L46)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Preface to the Christian Book of Concord 1–4

[1] To the readers, one and all, of these our writings: we are the electors, princes, and deputies of the Holy Roman Empire in Germany, supporters of the Augsburg Confession, who subscribed our names to that document. We announce and declare— according to the dignity and rank of each person—our devotion, friendship, and greeting, combined with willing service.

## [The Issues]

[2] In these Last Times and in this old age of the world [Acts 2:17], what a remarkable favor of almighty God has arisen after the darkness of papal superstitions! According to His unspeakable love, patience, and mercy, He willed that the light of His Gospel [2 Corinthians 4:4] and Word—through which alone we receive true salvation—should arise and shine clearly and purely in Germany, our most beloved fatherland. Therefore, a brief and succinct Confession was prepared from God’s Word—the most holy writings of the prophets and apostles [2 Peter 3:2]. At the Diet of Augsburg, in the year 1530, this Confession was offered in the German and Latin languages by our most godly ancestors, to the Emperor Charles V, of excellent memory. It was laid before the deputies of the Empire. Finally, it was circulated publicly in the entire world among all people professing Christian doctrine. So it was spread everywhere and began to be found in the mouths and speech of all.

[3] Later, many churches and schools embraced and defended this Confession as a current symbol for the chief articles of faith. This was done especially by those involved in controversy with the Romanists and various corruptions of the heavenly doctrine. With lasting agreement they appealed to the Augsburg Confession without any controversy and doubt. They knew that the doctrine included in it was both supported by firm testimonies of Scripture and approved by the ancient and accepted symbols [creeds]. They have also constantly judged this Confession to be the only and lasting consensus of the true, believing Church. In the past this consensus was defended against many heresies and errors—now it is repeated.

[4] No one can be ignorant of this fact: immediately after Dr. Martin Luther (that most distinguished hero, endowed with most eminent piety) was removed from human affairs, Germany, our dear fatherland, experienced most perilous times and most severe disturbances. In these difficulties, and in the sad division of a government that was earlier flourishing and well regulated, the enemy of mortals [Satan] cunningly labored. He scattered the seeds of false doctrine and dissensions in the churches and schools [Matthew 13:24–30]. He also labored to stir up divisions [Romans 16:17] combined with offense. By these arts of his, he labored to corrupt the purity of the heavenly doctrine, to sever the bond of Christian love and godly agreement [Ephesians 4:3], and to hinder and delay to a greater degree the spread of the most holy Gospel. It is also known to all how the enemies of the heavenly doctrine seized this opportunity to speak against our churches and schools, to disguise their errors, and to draw alarmed and erring consciences away from the purity of Gospel teaching. They did this to make people more willing to bear and tolerate the yoke of papal slavery, and also to embrace other corruptions conflicting with God’s Word.
