# May 23

## Psalmody

12What man is there who de- | sires life* and loves many days, that he may | see good? 13Keep your tongue from | evil* and your lips from speak- | ing deceit. 14Turn away from evil | and do good;* seek peace and pur- | sue it. 15The eyes of the LORD are toward the | righteous* and his ears | toward their cry. 16The face of the LORD is against those who do | evil,* to cut off the memory of them | from the earth. 17When the righteous cry for help, the | LORD hears* and delivers them out of all their | troubles. 18The LORD is near to the broken- | hearted* and saves the crushed in | spirit. 19Many are the afflictions of the | righteous,* but the LORD delivers him out | of them all. 20He keeps | all his bones;* not one of them is | broken. 21Affliction will slay the | wicked,* and those who hate the righteous will | be condemned. 22The LORD redeems the life of his | servants;* none of those who take refuge in him will | be condemned.—Psalm 34:12–22
Additional Psalm: Psalm 34

## Old Testament Reading: Song of Solomon 7:6–8:14

6How beautiful and pleasant you are, O loved one, with all your delights! 7Your stature is like a palm tree, and your breasts are like its clusters. 8I say I will climb the palm tree and lay hold of its fruit. Oh may your breasts be like clusters of the vine, and the scent of your breath like apples, 9and your mouth like the best wine. Bride It goes down smoothly for my beloved, gliding over lips and teeth. 10I am my beloved’s, and his desire is for me.

The Bride Gives Her Love

11Come, my beloved, let us go out into the fields and lodge in the villages; 12let us go out early to the vineyards and see whether the vines have budded, whether the grape blossoms have opened and the pomegranates are in bloom. There I will give you my love. 13The mandrakes give forth fragrance, and beside our doors are all choice fruits, new as well as old, which I have laid up for you, O my beloved.

Longing for Her Beloved

8:1Oh that you were like a brother to me who nursed at my mother’s breasts! If I found you outside, I would kiss you, and none would despise me. 2I would lead you and bring you into the house of my mother—she who used to teach me. I would give you spiced wine to drink, the juice of my pomegranate. 3His left hand is under my head, and his right hand embraces me! 4I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that you not stir up or awaken love until it pleases. 5Who is that coming up from the wilderness, leaning on her beloved? Under the apple tree I awakened you. There your mother was in labor with you; there she who bore you was in labor. 6Set me as a seal upon your heart, as a seal upon your arm, for love is strong as death, jealousy is fierce as the grave. Its flashes are flashes of fire, the very flame of the LORD. 7Many waters cannot quench love, neither can floods drown it. If a man offered for love all the wealth of his house, he would be utterly despised. Final Advice

Chorus of Women

8We have a little sister, and she has no breasts. What shall we do for our sister on the day when she is spoken for? 9If she is a wall, we will build on her a battlement of silver, but if she is a door, we will enclose her with boards of cedar.

Bride

10I was a wall, and my breasts were like towers; then I was in his eyes as one who finds peace. 11Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon; he let out the vineyard to keepers; each one was to bring for its fruit a thousand pieces of silver. 12My vineyard, my very own, is before me; you, O Solomon, may have the thousand, and the keepers of the fruit two hundred.

Groom

13O you who dwell in the gardens, with companions listening for your voice; let me hear it.

Bride

14Make haste, my beloved, and be like a gazelle or a young stag on the mountains of spices.

## New Testament Reading: John 6:41–59

[I Am the Bread of Life]

41So the Jews grumbled about him, because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.” 42They said, “Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How does he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?” 43Jesus answered them, “Do not grumble among yourselves. 44No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day. 45It is written in the Prophets, ‘And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has heard and learned from the Father comes to me—46not that anyone has seen the Father except he who is from God; he has seen the Father. 47Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes has eternal life. 48I am the bread of life. 49Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died. 50This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that one may eat of it and not die. 51I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And the bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.” 52The Jews then disputed among themselves, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” 53So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. 54Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day. 55For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink. 56Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him. 57As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so whoever feeds on me, he also will live because of me. 58This is the bread that came down from heaven, not like the bread the fathers ate and died. Whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.” 59Jesus said these things in the synagogue, as he taught at Capernaum.

## Writing

Thus the Lord declared above: “He who believes in Me has eternal life” and: “I am the bread of life.” These words greatly offended the Jews. It annoyed them to think that this Man should have the power to save, to bestow eternal life, and also to deliver us from death, sin, and all evil. After all, He did not give that appearance. He was a poor man, the son of a poor carpenter and of a poor mother, devoid of all power. Therefore, it sounded unreasonable to hear Him say: “He who believes in Me will have eternal life.” But I have told you that whoever would remain a Christian and be saved must not follow his eyes or judge by appearances, confer with reason, or employ his other senses in this matter; he must hear solely what is preached to him and must turn his ear to the lips of this Man. Whoever fails to do this, but surrenders and forsakes God’s Word, is lost. Christ swears an oath attesting this: “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in Me has eternal life. This is the only way to eternal life and the only redemption from sin, death, and devil, namely, your faith in Me; for I am the Way and the Life (John 14:6). If you can obtain this bread and permit Me to feed you, that is, if you believe in Me, then you are healthy. Then sin, death, and hell cannot harm you, and you are rid of all your enemies.”—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

What higher gift can we inherit? It is faith’s bond and solid base;
It is the strength of heart and spirit, The covenant of hope and grace. Lord,
may Thy body and Thy blood
Be for my soul the highest good! (LSB 618:5)

## Prayer of the Day

Gracious Father, Your blessed Son came down from heaven to be the true bread that gives life to the world. Grant that Christ, the bread of life, may live in us and we in Him, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (B72)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Preface to the Christian Book of Concord 17–19

[17] Furthermore, we write about the second edition of the Augsburg Confession. We note that mention is made about this in the transcripts at Naumburg. What is also known to all is that, by appealing to the wording of this latter edition, some have wanted to cover and conceal corruptions regarding the Lord’s Supper and other errors. They have attempted to thrust their errors upon an ignorant populace by means of published writings. They have not been motivated by the distinct words of the Augsburg Confession—which was presented first. These errors are openly rejected by the first Augsburg Confession and a far different meaning than these people want can be shown in that document. Therefore, we have decided in this writing to testify publicly about this and to inform all: we wanted neither then nor now in any way to defend, excuse, or approve false and godless doctrines and opinions. Such things may lie concealed under certain coverings of words, as though they agreed with the Gospel doctrine. Indeed, we never understood the second edition in a different sense in any part from the first edition that was presented. Neither do we think that other useful writings of Dr. Philip Melanchthon, or of Brentz, Urban Rhegius, Pomeranus, or others, should be rejected and condemned. As long as, in all things, those writings agree with the standard that has been set forth in the Book of Concord.

[18] Now, some theologians (and Luther himself among them), when they wrote about the Lord’s Supper, were drawn, against their will, by their adversaries to disputes about the personal union of the two natures in Christ. Yet our theologians in the Book of Concord, and by its standard of sound doctrine, testify what is our constant and never-ending opinion and that of this book: for the Lord’s Supper, godly people should be led to no other foundations than the words of institution in the testament of our Lord Jesus Christ. For He is both almighty and true. So it is easy for Him to do those things that He has both instituted and promised in His Word. When this foundation is not attacked by their adversaries, our theologians will not fight back in this kind of argument about other methods of proof. But, in true simplicity of faith, they will firmly insist upon Christ’s very plain words. (That is the safest method, and it is best suited for the instruction of uneducated people. For they do not understand those things that have been discussed with greater exactness.) Indeed, it is our assertion that the simple meaning of the words of Christ’s testament are attacked by the adversaries. The adversaries’ attacks are rejected as godless and conflicting with the nature of true faith. Finally, we say they are contrary to the Apostles’ Creed. (Especially to the statements about the incarnation of God’s Son, His ascension into heaven, and His sitting at the right hand of the almighty power and majesty of God [Hebrews 1:3].) Therefore, their attacks are false. So it must be shown by a true and thorough interpretation of these articles that our opinion differs neither from Christ’s words nor from these articles.

## [The Book of Concord]

Now, about the phrases and forms of expression that are used in this Book of Concord.

[19] We speak of the majesty of the human nature in the person of Christ, elevated and placed at God’s right hand. We do this in order to remove all subtle suspicions and causes of offense that might arise from the different uses of the word abstract (as both the schools and the fathers have used this term up to now). In distinct and clear words, our theologians want to testify that this majesty is in no way to be ascribed to Christ’s human nature outside of the personal union. Neither are we to grant that Christ’s human nature possesses this majesty as its own or by itself (even in the personal union) essentially, formally, habitually, subjectively. (The schools like these terms, although they are not good Latin.) For if we would adopt this method of speaking and teaching, the divine and human natures, with their properties, would be confused. And the human, with its essence and properties, would be made equal to the divine. Indeed, the human nature would be completely denied. Therefore, the theologians conclude that we should believe that this union happens according to the method and order of the personal union. Learned antiquity has spoken cautiously about this subject—it is a mystery so great that it exceeds all the powers of our natural ability and understanding.
