# May 27

## Psalmody

4One thing have I asked of the LORD, that will I seek | after:* that I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, to gaze upon the beauty of the LORD and to inquire in his | temple. 5For he will hide me in his shelter in the day of | trouble;* he will conceal me under the cover of his tent; he will lift me high up- | on a rock. 6And now my head shall be lifted up above my enemies all around me, and I will offer in his tent sacrifices with | shouts of joy;* I will sing and make melody | to the LORD. 7Hear, O LORD, when I | cry aloud;* be gracious to me and | answer me! 8You have said, | “Seek my face.”* My heart says to you, “Your face, LORD, | do I seek.” 9Hide not your face from me. Turn not your servant away in | anger,* O you who have been my help. Cast me not off; forsake me not, O God of my sal- | vation! 10For my father and my mother have for- | saken me,* but the LORD will | take me in.—Psalm 27:4–10
Additional Psalm: Psalm 83

## Old Testament Reading: Ecclesiastes 4:1–16

Evil Under the Sun

1Again I saw all the oppressions that are done under the sun. And behold, the tears of the oppressed, and they had no one to comfort them! On the side of their oppressors there was power, and there was no one to comfort them. 2And I thought the dead who are already dead more fortunate than the living who are still alive. 3But better than both is he who has not yet been and has not seen the evil deeds that are done under the sun. 4Then I saw that all toil and all skill in work come from a man’s envy of his neighbor. This also is vanity and a striving after wind. 5The fool folds his hands and eats his own flesh. 6Better is a handful of quietness than two hands full of toil and a striving after wind. 7Again, I saw vanity under the sun: 8one person who has no other, either son or brother, yet there is no end to all his toil, and his eyes are never satisfied with riches, so that he never asks, “For whom am I toiling and depriving myself of pleasure?” This also is vanity and an unhappy business. 9Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their toil. 10For if they fall, one will lift up his fellow. But woe to him who is alone when he falls and has not another to lift him up! 11Again, if two lie together, they keep warm, but how can one keep warm alone? 12And though a man might prevail against one who is alone, two will withstand him—a threefold cord is not quickly broken. 13Better was a poor and wise youth than an old and foolish king who no longer knew how to take advice. 14For he went from prison to the throne, though in his own kingdom he had been born poor. 15I saw all the living who move about under the sun, along with that youth who was to stand in the king’s place. 16There was no end of all the people, all of whom he led. Yet those who come later will not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and a striving after wind.

## New Testament Reading: John 7:32–53

Officers Sent to Arrest Jesus

32The Pharisees heard the crowd muttering these things about him, and the chief priests and Pharisees sent officers to arrest him. 33Jesus then said, “I will be with you a little longer, and then I am going to him who sent me. 34You will seek me and you will not find me. Where I am you cannot come.” 35The Jews said to one another, “Where does this man intend to go that we will not find him? Does he intend to go to the Dispersion among the Greeks and teach the Greeks? 36What does he mean by saying, ‘You will seek me and you will not find me,’ and, ‘Where I am you cannot come’?”

Rivers of Living Water

37On the last day of the feast, the great day, Jesus stood up and cried out, “If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink. 38Whoever believes in me, as the Scripture has said, ‘Out of his heart will flow rivers of living water.’” 39Now this he said about the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were to receive, for as yet the Spirit had not been given, because Jesus was not yet glorified.

Division Among the People

40When they heard these words, some of the people said, “This really is the Prophet.” 41Others said, “This is the Christ.” But some said, “Is the Christ to come from Galilee? 42Has not the Scripture said that the Christ comes from the offspring of David, and comes from Bethlehem, the village where David was?” 43So there was a division among the people over him. 44Some of them wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands on him. 45The officers then came to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, “Why did you not bring him?” 46The officers answered, “No one ever spoke like this man!” 47The Pharisees answered them, “Have you also been deceived? 48Have any of the authorities or the Pharisees believed in him? 49But this crowd that does not know the law is accursed.” 50Nicodemus, who had gone to him before, and who was one of them, said to them, 51“Does our law judge a man without first giving him a hearing and learning what he does?” 52They replied, “Are you from Galilee too? Search and see that no prophet arises from Galilee.” 53They went each to his own house.

## Writing

For this reason, therefore, the Law is not against the promises of God: first, because the promise does not depend on the Law but on the truth of God; secondly, because in its highest and greatest use the Law humbles and by humbling makes men groan, sigh, and seek the hand of the Mediator. It makes His grace and mercy very sweet—as Ps. 109:21 says, “Thy mercy is sweet”—and His gift precious beyond the telling. Thus it makes us ready for Christ. He who has never tasted the bitter will not remember the sweet; hunger is the best cook. As the dry earth thirsts for rain, so the Law makes the troubled heart thirst for Christ. To such hearts Christ tastes sweetest; to them He is joy, comfort, and life. Only then are Christ and His work understood correctly. Therefore the best use of the Law is to be able to employ it to the point that it produces humility and a thirst for Christ. He Himself requires thirsting souls and attracts them in a most charming manner to Himself when He says (Matt. 11:28): “Come to Me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Therefore He gladly soaks and irrigates this dry ground. He does not pour out His waters on ground that is fertile or fat or free of thirst. His blessings are inestimable. Therefore He grants them only to the needy; He preaches good news to the poor (Luke 4:18) and gives water to the thirsty. “If anyone thirst,” He says in John 7:37, “let him come to Me.” “He heals the brokenhearted” (Ps. 147:3). That is, He comforts and saves those who have been vexed and troubled by the Law. Accordingly, the Law is not against the promises of God.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

See, the streams of living waters, Springing from eternal love,
Well supply your sons and daughters And all fear of want remove.
Who can faint while such a river Ever will their thirst assuage?
Grace, which like the Lord, the giver, Never fails from age to age. (LSB
648:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, on this day You once taught the hearts of Your faithful people by sending them the light of Your Holy Spirit. Grant us in our day by the same Spirit to have a right understanding in all things and evermore to rejoice in His holy consolation; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L50)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope 1–12

[1] The Roman pontiff claims for himself that he is ‹supreme above› all bishops and pastors by divine right.

[2] Second, he adds that by divine right he has both swords, that is, the authority also to enthrone and depose kings‹, regulate secular dominions, and such›.

[3] Third, he says that to believe this is necessary for salvation. For these reasons, the Roman bishop calls himself ‹and boasts that he is› the vicar of Christ on earth.

[4] These three articles we hold to be false, godless, tyrannical, and destructive to the Church.

[5] So that our proof may be better understood, we will first define what they call being above everyone by “divine right.” They mean that the pope is universal, or, as they say, he is the ecumenical bishop, from whom all bishops and pastors throughout the entire world should seek ordination. He is to have the right of electing, ordaining, confirming, and deposing all bishops.

[6] Besides this, he claims for himself the authority to make laws about acts of worship, about changing the Sacraments, and about doctrine. He wants his articles, his decrees, and his laws to be considered equal to the divine laws ‹to other articles of the Christian Creed and the Holy Scriptures›. In other words, he holds that people’s consciences are so bound by the papal laws that those who neglect them, even without public offense, sin mortally. What he adds is even more horrible; namely, that it is necessary to believe all these things in order to be saved.

## [Testimony of Scripture]

[7] In the first place, therefore, we will show from the Gospel that the Roman bishop is not above ‹cannot arrogate to himself any supremacy whatever over› other bishops and pastors by divine right.

[8] I. Luke 22:24–27. Christ clearly bans lordship among the apostles. This was the very question: When Christ spoke of His passion, the apostles were disputing over who should be the head of the others, and, as it were, the vicar of the absent Christ. Christ rebukes this error of the apostles and teaches that there shall not be lordship or superiority among them. Instead, the apostles would be sent forth as equals to the common ministry of the Gospel. So, He says, “The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and those in authority over them are called benefactors. But not so with you. Rather, let the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the leader as one who serves” (22:25–26). The contrast here shows that lordship [among the apostles] is not approved.

II. Matthew 18:2. When Christ, in the same dispute about the Kingdom, places a little child in their midst, He is teaching the same thing by parable. Just as a child neither takes nor seeks sovereignty for himself, so this shows that there is not to be sovereignty among ministers.

[9] III. John 20:21. Christ sends forth His disciples in equality, without any distinction ‹so that no one of them was to have more or less power than any other›. He says, “As the Father has sent Me, even so I am sending you.” He says that He sends them individually in the same way He Himself was sent [John 12:44–50]. Therefore, He grants no one a privilege or lordship above the rest.

[10] IV. Galatians 2:7–10. St. Paul clearly affirms that he was neither ordained nor confirmed by Peter. Nor does he acknowledge Peter to be one from whom confirmation should be sought. He plainly maintains on this point that his call does not depend upon Peter’s authority. If Peter were superior by divine right, he should have acknowledged Peter as a superior. Paul says that he had preached the Gospel without consulting Peter [Galatians 1:10–12]. Also, “from those who seemed to be influential (what they were makes no difference to me; God shows no partiality).” And, “Those, I say, who seemed influential added nothing to me” [2:6]. Paul clearly testifies that he did not even wish to seek the confirmation of Peter to preach, even when Paul had come to him. He teaches that the authority of the ministry depends upon God’s Word, and that Peter was not superior to the other apostles. Ordination or confirmation was not to be sought from this one individual, Peter ‹[Paul teaches] that the office of the ministry proceeds from the general call of the apostles and that it is not necessary for all to have the call or confirmation of this one person, Peter, alone›.

[11] V. In 1 Corinthians 3, Paul makes ministers equal. He also teaches that the Church is superior to ‹or: more than› the ministers. Superiority or lordship over the Church or the rest of the ministers is not attributed to Peter. For he says, “All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas” [3:21–22]. That is, do not let the other ministers or Peter assume for themselves lordship or superiority over the Church. Do not let them burden the Church with traditions. Do not let the authority of anyone prevail more than ‹God’s› Word. Do not let the authority of Cephas be opposed to the authority of the other apostles, as they reasoned at that time, “Cephas, who is an apostle of higher rank, observes this. Therefore, both Paul and the rest ought to observe this.” Paul removes this claim from Peter and denies that his authority is to be preferred to the rest or to the Church.

## Testimony of History

[12] VI. The Council of Nicaea resolved that the bishop of Alexandria should administer the churches in the East and the Roman bishop the suburban churches, that is, those in the Roman provinces in the West. From this start by a human law (i.e., the resolution of the council), the authority of the Roman bishop first arose. If the Roman bishop already had the superiority by divine law, it would not have been lawful for the council to take away any right from him and transfer it to the bishop of Alexandria. No, all the bishops of the East should always have sought ordination and confirmation from the bishop of Rome.
