# May 22

## Psalmody

16Better is the little that the | righteous has* than the abundance of many | wicked. 17For the arms of the wicked shall be | broken,* but the LORD upholds the | righteous. 18The LORD knows the days of the | blameless,* and their heritage will remain for- | ever; 19they are not put to shame in | evil times;* in the days of famine they have a- | bundance. 20But the wicked will perish; the enemies of the LORD are like the glory of the | pastures;* they vanish—like smoke they van- | ish away. 21The wicked borrows but does | not pay back,* but the righteous is gener- | ous and gives; 22for those blessed by the LORD shall inher- | it the land,* but those cursed by him shall | be cut off. 23The steps of a man are established | by the LORD,* when he delights | in his way; 24though he fall, he shall not be cast | headlong,* for the LORD up- | holds his hand. 25I have been young, and | now am old,* yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken or his children beg- | ging for bread. 26He is ever lending | generously,* and his children become a | blessing.—Psalm 37:16–26
Additional Psalm: Psalm 78

## Old Testament Reading:Song of Solomon 6:4–7:5

Solomon and His Bride Delight in Each Other

Groom

4You are beautiful as Tirzah, my love, lovely as Jerusalem, awesome as an army with banners. 5Turn away your eyes from me, for they overwhelm me—Your hair is like a flock of goats leaping down the slopes of Gilead. 6Your teeth are like a flock of ewes that have come up from the washing; all of them bear twins; not one among them has lost its young. 7Your cheeks are like halves of a pomegranate behind your veil. 8There are sixty queens and eighty concubines, and virgins without number. 9My dove, my perfect one, is the only one, the only one of her mother, pure to her who bore her. The young women saw her and called her blessed; the queens and concubines also, and they praised her. 10“Who is this who looks down like the dawn, beautiful as the moon, bright as the sun, awesome as an army with banners?”

Bride

11I went down to the nut orchard to look at the blossoms of the valley, to see whether the vines had budded, whether the pomegranates were in bloom. 12Before I was aware, my desire set me among the chariots of my kinsman, a prince.

Chorus of Women

13Return, return, O Shulammite, return, return, that we may look upon you. Groom Why should you look upon the Shulammite, as upon a dance before two armies? 7:1How beautiful are your feet in sandals, O noble daughter! Your rounded thighs are like jewels, the work of a master hand. 2Your navel is a rounded bowl that never lacks mixed wine. Your belly is a heap of wheat, encircled with lilies. 3Your two breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle. 4Your neck is like an ivory tower. Your eyes are pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim. Your nose is like a tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus. 5Your head crowns you like Carmel, and your flowing locks are like purple; a king is held captive in the tresses.

## New Testament Reading: John 6:22–40

I Am the Bread of Life

22On the next day the crowd that remained on the other side of the sea saw that there had been only one boat there, and that Jesus had not entered the boat with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone. 23Other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks. 24So when the crowd saw that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats and went to Capernaum, seeking Jesus. 25When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you come here?” 26Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you are seeking me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate your fill of the loaves. 27Do not labor for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For on him God the Father has set his seal.” 28Then they said to him, “What must we do, to be doing the works of God?” 29Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.” 30So they said to him, “Then what sign do you do, that we may see and believe you? What work do you perform? 31Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness; as it is written, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’” 32Jesus then said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, it was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. 33For the bread of God is he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.” 34They said to him, “Sir, give us this bread always.” 35Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life; whoever comes to me shall not hunger, and whoever believes in me shall never thirst. 36But I said to you that you have seen me and yet do not believe. 37All that the Father gives me will come to me, and whoever comes to me I will never cast out. 38For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will but the will of him who sent me. 39And this is the will of him who sent me, that I should lose nothing of all that he has given me, but raise it up on the last day. 40For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who looks on the Son and believes in him should have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”

## Writing

And now since He is believed as one Person, God and man, it is also proper for us to speak of Him as each nature requires. Some words reflect His human, others His divine nature. Therefore we should consider what Christ says according to His human nature and what He says according to His divine nature. For where this is not observed and properly distinguished, many types of heresy must result, as happened in times gone by, when some people asserted that Christ was not true God and others that He was not true man. They were unable to follow the principle of differentiating between the two types of discourse on the basis of the two natures. Christ often spoke as the lowliest man on earth should hardly speak. For example, when He says: “I have not come to be served, but to serve” (Matt. 20:28). With these words He really makes Himself a servant among all men, although He is true God and Lord over all creatures, whom all must serve and worship. And in Ps. 41:4 He makes Himself a sinner and says that He is being punished because of sin. This, of course, is out of the question according to the divine nature. And again, He employs the speech of exalted majesty, such as no angel or creature should use, even though He was in the lowliest form and figure of His sojourn on earth. We read, for instance, in John 6:62: “Then what if you were to see the Son of Man ascending where He was before?” Yes, all that Scripture says of Christ covers the whole Person, just as though both God and man were one essence.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

My Lord, You here have led me To this most holy place,
And with Yourself have fed me The treasures of Your grace;
For You have freely given What earth could never buy,
The bread of life from heaven, That now I shall not die.—O Living Bread
from Heaven (LSB 642:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful Father, You gave Your Son Jesus as the heavenly bread of life. Grant us faith to feast on Him in Your Word and Sacraments that we may be nourished unto life everlasting; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (B71)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Preface to the Christian Book of Concord 16
