# May 20

## Psalmody

105Your word is a lamp | to my feet* and a light | to my path. 106I have sworn an oath and con- | firmed it,* to keep your just and righ- | teous decrees. 107I am severely af- | flicted;* give me life, O LORD, according | to your word! 108Accept my freewill offerings of praise, | O LORD,* and teach me your | just decrees. 109I hold my life in my hand con- | tinually,* but I do not for- | get your law. 110The wicked have laid a | snare for me,* but I do not stray from your | precepts. 111Your testimonies are my heritage for- | ever,* for they are the joy | of my heart. 112I incline my heart to perform your | statutes* forever, | to the end.—Psalm 119:105–112
Additional Psalm: Psalm 75

## Old Testament Reading: Song of Solomon 4:1–5:1

Solomon Admires His Bride’s Beauty

Groom

1Behold, you are beautiful, my love, behold, you are beautiful! Your eyes are doves behind your veil. Your hair is like a flock of goats leaping down the slopes of Gilead. 2Your teeth are like a flock of shorn ewes that have come up from the washing, all of which bear twins, and not one among them has lost its young. 3Your lips are like a scarlet thread, and your mouth is lovely. Your cheeks are like halves of a pomegranate behind your veil. 4Your neck is like the tower of David, built in rows of stone; on it hang a thousand shields, all of them shields of warriors. 5Your two breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle, that graze among the lilies. 6Until the day breathes and the shadows flee, I will go away to the mountain of myrrh and the hill of frankincense. 7You are altogether beautiful, my love; there is no flaw in you. 8Come with me from Lebanon, my bride; come with me from Lebanon. Depart from the peak of Amana, from the peak of Senir and Hermon, from the dens of lions, from the mountains of leopards. 9You have captivated my heart, my sister, my bride; you have captivated my heart with one glance of your eyes, with one jewel of your necklace. 10How beautiful is your love, my sister, my bride! How much better is your love than wine, and the fragrance of your oils than any spice! 11Your lips drip nectar, my bride; honey and milk are under your tongue; the fragrance of your garments is like the fragrance of Lebanon. 12A garden locked is my sister, my bride, a spring locked, a fountain sealed. 13Your shoots are an orchard of pomegranates with all choicest fruits, henna with nard, 14nard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense, myrrh and aloes, with all choice spices—15a garden fountain, a well of living water, and flowing streams from Lebanon. 16Awake, O north wind, and come, O south wind! Blow upon my garden, let its spices flow. Together in the Garden of Love Bride Let my beloved come to his garden, and eat its choicest fruits.

Groom

5:1I came to my garden, my sister, my bride, I gathered my myrrh with my spice, I ate my honeycomb with my honey, I drank my wine with my milk. Chorus of Women Eat, friends, drink, and be drunk with love!

## New Testament Reading: John 5:30–47

Witnesses to Jesus

30“I can do nothing on my own. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I seek not my own will but the will of him who sent me. 31If I alone bear witness about myself, my testimony is not deemed true. 32There is another who bears witness about me, and I know that the testimony that he bears about me is true. 33You sent to John, and he has borne witness to the truth. 34Not that the testimony that I receive is from man, but I say these things so that you may be saved. 35He was a burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light. 36But the testimony that I have is greater than that of John. For the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, bear witness about me that the Father has sent me. 37And the Father who sent me has himself borne witness about me. His voice you have never heard, his form you have never seen, 38and you do not have his word abiding in you, for you do not believe the one whom he has sent. 39You search the Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is they that bear witness about me, 40yet you refuse to come to me that you may have life. 41I do not receive glory from people. 42But I know that you do not have the love of God within you. 43I have come in my Father’s name, and you do not receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him. 44How can you believe, when you receive glory from one another and do not seek the glory that comes from the only God? 45Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one who accuses you: Moses, on whom you have set your hope. 46For if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote of me. 47But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?”

## Writing

IV. Our churches teach that people cannot be justified before God by their own strength, merits, or works. People are freely justified for Christ’s sake, through faith, when they believe that they are received into favor and that their sins are forgiven for Christ’s sake. By His death, Christ made satisfaction for our sins. God counts this faith for righteousness in His sight (Romans 3 and 4 [3:21–26; 4:5]). V. So that we may obtain this faith, the ministry of teaching the Gospel and administering the Sacraments was instituted. Through the Word and Sacraments, as through instruments, the Holy Spirit is given [John 20:22]. He works faith, when and where it pleases God [John 3:8], in those who hear the good news that God justifies those who believe that they are received into grace for Christ’s sake. This happens not through our own merits, but for Christ’s sake. Our churches condemn the Anabaptists and others who think that through their own preparations and works the Holy Spirit comes to them without the external Word. VI. Our churches teach that this faith is bound to bring forth good fruit [Galatians 5:22–23]. It is necessary to do good works commanded by God [Ephesians 2:10], because of God’s will. We should not rely on those works to merit justification before God. The forgiveness of sins and justification is received through faith. The voice of Christ testifies, “So you also, when you have done all that you were commanded, say, ‘We are unworthy servants; we have only done what was our duty’” (Luke 17:10). The Fathers teach the same thing. Ambrose says, “It is ordained of God that he who believes in Christ is saved, freely receiving forgiveness of sins, without works, through faith alone.”—Augsburg Confession IV–VI

## Hymnody

“Yes, Father, yes, most willingly I—ll bear what You command Me.
My will conforms to Your decree, I—ll do what You have asked Me.”
O wondrous Love, what have You done!
The Father offers up His Son, Desiring our salvation.
O Love, how strong You are to save!
You lay the One into the grave Who built the earth’s foundation. (LSB
438:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and everlasting God, give us an increase of faith, hope, and love that we may trust the testimony of Scripture concerning You and obtain what You have promised; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord. (1030)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Preface to the Christian Book of Concord 8–11
