# June 1

## Psalmody

4His lightnings light | up the world;* the earth sees and | trembles. 5The mountains melt like wax be- | fore the LORD,* before the Lord of | all the earth. 6The heavens proclaim his | righteousness,* and all the peoples see his | glory. 7All worshipers of images are put to shame, who make their boast in worthless | idols;* worship him, | all you gods! 8Zion hears and is glad, and the daughters of Ju- | dah rejoice,* because of your judgments, | O LORD. 9For you, O LORD, are most high over | all the earth;* you are exalted far a- | bove all gods. 10O you who love the LORD, hate | evil!* He preserves the lives of his saints; he delivers them from the hand of the | wicked. 11Light is sown for the | righteous,* and joy for the up- | right in heart. 12Rejoice in the LORD, O you | righteous,* and give thanks to his | holy name!—Psalm 97:4–12
Additional Psalm: Psalm 115

## Old Testament Reading: Ecclesiastes 9:1–17

Death Comes to All

1But all this I laid to heart, examining it all, how the righteous and the wise and their deeds are in the hand of God. Whether it is love or hate, man does not know; both are before him. 2It is the same for all, since the same event happens to the righteous and the wicked, to the good and the evil, to the clean and the unclean, to him who sacrifices and him who does not sacrifice. As the good one is, so is the sinner, and he who swears is as he who shuns an oath. 3This is an evil in all that is done under the sun, that the same event happens to all. Also, the hearts of the children of man are full of evil, and madness is in their hearts while they live, and after that they go to the dead. 4But he who is joined with all the living has hope, for a living dog is better than a dead lion. 5For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing, and they have no more reward, for the memory of them is forgotten. 6Their love and their hate and their envy have already perished, and forever they have no more share in all that is done under the sun.

Enjoy Life with the One You Love

7Go, eat your bread with joy, and drink your wine with a merry heart, for God has already approved what you do. 8Let your garments be always white. Let not oil be lacking on your head. 9Enjoy life with the wife whom you love, all the days of your vain life that he has given you under the sun, because that is your portion in life and in your toil at which you toil under the sun. 10Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with your might, for there is no work or thought or knowledge or wisdom in Sheol, to which you are going.

Wisdom Better than Folly

11Again I saw that under the sun the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor riches to the intelligent, nor favor to those with knowledge, but time and chance happen to them all. 12For man does not know his time. Like fish that are taken in an evil net, and like birds that are caught in a snare, so the children of man are snared at an evil time, when it suddenly falls upon them. 13I have also seen this example of wisdom under the sun, and it seemed great to me. 14There was a little city with few men in it, and a great king came against it and besieged it, building great siegeworks against it. 15But there was found in it a poor, wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city. Yet no one remembered that poor man. 16But I say that wisdom is better than might, though the poor man’s wisdom is despised and his words are not heard. 17The words of the wise heard in quiet are better than the shouting of a ruler among fools.

## New Testament Reading: John 9:24–41

[Jesus Heals a Man Born Blind]

24So for the second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him, “Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.” 25He answered, “Whether he is a sinner I do not know. One thing I do know, that though I was blind, now I see.” 26They said to him, “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?” 27He answered them, “I have told you already, and you would not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become his disciples?” 28And they reviled him, saying, “You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses. 29We know that God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, we do not know where he comes from.” 30The man answered, “Why, this is an amazing thing! You do not know where he comes from, and yet he opened my eyes. 31We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshiper of God and does his will, God listens to him. 32Never since the world began has it been heard that anyone opened the eyes of a man born blind. 33If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.” 34They answered him, “You were born in utter sin, and would you teach us?” And they cast him out. 35Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him he said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?” 36He answered, “And who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?” 37Jesus said to him, “You have seen him, and it is he who is speaking to you.” 38He said, “Lord, I believe,” and he worshiped him. 39Jesus said, “For judgment I came into this world, that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.” 40Some of the Pharisees near him heard these things, and said to him, “Are we also blind?” 41Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, you would have no guilt; but now that you say, ‘We see,’ your guilt remains.”

## Writing

There remains the oft-repeated statement in Eccl. 9:1–2: “The righteous and the wise and their works are in the hand of God, and man does not know if he is worthy of love or hatred, but all things are kept uncertain in the future.” Therefore [they say] in this life believers are uncertain whether they are under God’s love or His hatred, but this will only be made manifest in the coming age. But this passage does not read this way in the Hebrew, the Greek, in Jerome’s translation, nor among the ancient writers who commented on the Book of Ecclesiastes. The sense is entirely clear. For the author adds this because things turn out equally for the righteous and the ungodly, for the good and the evil, that is, we must not and cannot determine on the basis of the outcome whether we are pleasing to God. But it does not follow, because we cannot make a determination from the outcome, that therefore faith on the basis of the Word of God must remain uncertain. In another place in the same book [3:19] there is this statement: “The spirit of man is mortal, just as the spirit of beasts.” He is saying that on the basis of external events it is impossible to know whether the spirit of man differs from that of an animal, because the death of both is the same. Bernard explains: Reason of itself cannot know this, but faith, the truth of the Word of God, and the Spirit help us. And so in the same chapter Solomon soon says: “Your works are pleasing to God” [9:7].—Martin Chemnitz

## Hymnody

It was grace in Christ that called me, Taught my darkened heart and mind;
Else the world had yet enthralled me, To Thy heav—nly glories blind.
Now I worship none above Thee; For Thy grace alone I thirst,
Knowing well that, if I love Thee, Thou, O Lord, didst love me first. (LSB
573:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and everlasting God, You found Your martyr Justin wandering from teacher to teacher, searching for the true God. Grant that all who seek for a deeper knowledge of the sublime wisdom of Your eternal Word may be found by You, who sent Your Son to seek and to save the lost; through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1034) Justin, Martyr Born at the beginning of the second century, Justin was raised in a pagan family. He was a student of philosophy who converted to the Christian faith and became a teacher in Ephesus and Rome. After refusing to make pagan sacrifices, he was arrested, tried, and executed, along with six other believers. The official Roman court proceedings of his trial before Rusticius, a Roman prelate, document his confession of faith. The account of his martyrdom became a source of great encouragement to the early Christian community. Much of what we know of early liturgical practice comes from Justin.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope 68–82

[68] Here belong the statements of Christ that testify that the Keys have been given to the Church, and not merely to certain persons, “Where two or three are gathered in My name . . . ” [Matthew 18:20].

[69] Finally, Peter’s statement also confirms this, “You are . . . a royal priesthood” [1 Peter 2:9]. These words apply to the True Church, which certainly has the right to elect and ordain ministers, since it alone has the priesthood.

[70] A most common custom of the Church also testifies to this. Formerly, the people elected pastors and bishops [Acts 14:23]. Then came a bishop, either of that church or a neighboring one, who confirmed the one elected by the laying on of hands [1 Timothy 4:14]. Ordination was nothing else than such a ratification.

[71] Afterward, new ceremonies were added, many of which Dionysius describes. But he is a recent and fictitious author, whoever he may be, just as the writings of Clement also are spurious. Then more modern writers added, “I give you the power to sacrifice for the living and the dead.” This is not even in Dionysius.

[72] From all of this, it is clear that the Church retains the right to elect and ordain ministers. The impiety and tyranny of bishops cause schism and discord. ‹Therefore, if the bishops are heretics, or will not ordain suitable persons, the churches are in duty bound before God, according to divine law, to ordain for themselves pastors and ministers. Even though this is now called an irregularity or schism, it should be known that the godless doctrine and tyranny of bishops is chargeable with it.› Paul commands that bishops who teach and defend a godless doctrine and godless services should be considered accursed (Galatians 1:7–9).

[73] We have spoken of ordination, which alone, as Jerome says, distinguished bishops from other elders. There is no need to discuss the other duties of bishops. It is not necessary to speak about confirmation or the consecration of bells ‹nor other such delusions›, which are almost the only things they have kept. Something, though, must be said about jurisdiction.

[74] Certainly, the common jurisdiction of excommunicating those guilty of clear crimes belongs to all pastors [1 Corinthians 5]. The bishops have tyrannically transferred this to themselves alone and have used it for their own gain. It is certain that the officials, as they are called, used an intolerable license. Either because of greed or because of other immoral desires, they tormented people and excommunicated them without any due process of law.

[75] What tyranny it is for the officials in the states to have arbitrary power to do this! In what kinds of issues did they abuse this power? Not in punishing true offenses, but in punishing violations of fasts or festivals, or such silly things! They sometimes did punish adulteries, but in this they often harass ‹abuse and defame› innocent and honorable people. Besides, since adultery is a most grievous offense, certainly no one should be condemned without due process of law.

[76] Since bishops have tyrannically transferred this jurisdiction to themselves alone and have basely abused it, there is no need to obey bishops. Since there are just reasons why we do not obey, it is also right to restore this jurisdiction to godly pastors and to make sure that it is legitimately exercised for the reformation of morals and the glory of God.

[77] There remains the jurisdiction, according to Church law, in cases that relate to the Church court, as they call it, and especially in cases of marriage. This, too, the bishops have only by human right, which is not a very old one. According to the Codex and Novellae of Justinian, decisions about marriage at that time belonged to the rulers. By divine right, earthly rulers must make these decisions if the bishops are negligent. Church law also concedes this. So for this jurisdiction also, it is not necessary to obey bishops.

[78] Since the bishops have framed unjust laws about marriages and observe them in their courts, there is a need to establish other courts. The traditions ‹banning the marriage› of those who have a spiritual relationship are unjust. Also unjust is the tradition forbidding an innocent person to marry after divorce [Matthew 5:32]. Also unjust is the law that in general approves all secret and deceitful engagements in violation of parental rights. Also unjust is the law requiring the celibacy of priests. There are also other snares of conscience in their laws. There is no need to recite them all. It is enough to say that there are many unjust laws of the pope regarding marriage. Because of these, the rulers should establish other courts.

[79] So the bishops who are devoted to the pope defend godless doctrine and godless services. They do not ordain godly teachers, and they aid the cruelty of the pope. Besides, they have wrestled away the jurisdiction from pastors and exercise it tyrannically ‹for their own profit›. Finally, in marriage cases they observe many unjust laws. So there are enough and necessary reasons why the churches should not recognize these men as bishops.

[80] They themselves should remember that riches have been given to bishops as alms for the administration and advantage of the churches. As the rule says, “The benefit is given because of the office.” Therefore, they cannot with a good conscience possess these alms and defraud the Church. The Church has need of this money to support ministers, aid education, care for the poor, and establish courts, especially for marriage.

[81] So great is the variety and extent of marriage controversies that there is need for a special court, for which the endowments of the Church are needed.

[82] Peter predicted that there would be godless bishops who would abuse the alms of the Church for luxury and neglect the ministry (2 Peter [2:13]). Therefore, let those who defraud the Church know that they will pay God the penalty for this crime.

## Doctors and Preachers Who Subscribed to the Augsburg Confession and Apology, A.D. 1537

According to the command of the most illustrious princes and of the orders and states professing the doctrine of the Gospel, we have reread the articles of the Confession presented to the Emperor in the Assembly at Augsburg. By God’s favor, all the preachers who have been present in this Assembly at Smalcald harmoniously declare that they believe and teach in their churches according to the articles of the Confession and Apology. They also declare that they approve the article about the primacy of the pope and his power, and the power and jurisdiction of bishops, which was presented to the princes in this assembly at Smalcald. So they subscribe their names.

[1] I, Doctor John Bugenhagen, Pomeranus, subscribe the Articles of the Augsburg Confession, the Apology, and the Article presented to the princes at Smalcald concerning the papacy.

[2] I also, Doctor Urban Rhegius, Superintendent of the Churches in the Duchy of Lüneburg, subscribe.

[3] Nicholas Amsdorf of Magdeburg subscribed.

[4] George Spalatin of Altenburg subscribed.

[5] I, Andreas Osiander, subscribe.

[6] Magister Veit Dietrich of Nürnberg subscribed.

[7] Stephen Agricola, Minister at Hof, subscribed with his own hand.

[8] John Draconites of Marburg subscribed.

[9] Conrad Figenbotz subscribed to all throughout.

[10] Martin Bucer.

[11] I, Erhard Schnepf, subscribe.

[12] Paul Rhodius, Preacher in Stettin.

[13] Gerhard Öniken, Minister of the Church at Minden.

[14] Brixius Northanus, Minister at Söst.

[15] Simon Schneeweiss, Pastor of Crailsheim.

[16] I, Pomeranus, again subscribe in the name of Schoolmaster John Brenz, as he ordered me.

[17] Philip Melanchthon subscribes with his own hand.

[18] Anthony Corvinus subscribes with his own hand, as well as in the name of Adam [Krafft] of Fulda.

[19] John Schlaginhaufen subscribes with his own hand.

[20] Schoolmaster George Helt of Forchheim.

[21] Michael Cölius, Preacher at Mansfeld.

[22] Peter Geltner, Preacher of the church of Frankfurt.

[23] Dionysius Melander subscribed.

[24] Paul Fagius of Strasbourg.

[25] Wendel Faber, Pastor of Seeburg in Mansfeld.

[26] Conrad Ötinger of Pforzheim, Preacher of Ulrich, Duke of Württemberg.

[27] Boniface Wolfart, Minister of the Word of the Church at Augsburg.

[28] John Aepinus, Superintendent of Hamburg, subscribed with his own hand.

[29] John [Tieman] of Amsterdam of Bremen does the same.

[30] John Fontanus, Superintendent of Lower Hesse, subscribed.

[31] Frederick Myconius subscribed for himself and Justus Menius.

[32] Ambrose Blaurer.

I have read, and again and again reread, the Confession and Apology presented at Augsburg by the Most Illustrious Prince, the Elector of Saxony, and by the other princes and estates of the Roman Empire, to his Imperial Majesty. I have also read the Formula of Concord concerning the Sacrament, made at Wittenberg with Dr. Bucer and others. I have also read the articles written at the Assembly at Smalcald in the German language by Dr. Martin Luther, our most revered teacher, and the tract concerning the Papacy and the Power and Jurisdiction of Bishops. In my humble opinion I judge that all these agree with Holy Scripture and with the belief of the true and genuine catholic Church. But although I am in so great a number of most learned men who have now assembled at Smalcald, I acknowledge that I am the least of all. Yet, as I am not permitted to await the end of the assembly, I ask you, most renowned man, Dr. John Bugenhagen, most revered Father in Christ, that your courtesy may add my name, if it be necessary, to all that I have above mentioned. For I testify in this my own handwriting that I thus hold, confess, and constantly will teach, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.

John Brenz, Minister of Hall.Done at Smalcald,February 23, 1537.
