# June 8

## Psalmody

7How precious is your steadfast love, | O God!* The children of mankind take refuge in the shadow | of your wings. 8They feast on the abundance | of your house,* and you give them drink from the river of | your delights. 9For with you is the foun- | tain of life;* in your light do | we see light. 10Oh, continue your steadfast love to those who | know you,* and your righteousness to the up- | right of heart! 11Let not the foot of arrogance come up- | on me,* nor the hand of the wicked drive | me away. 12There the evildoers lie | fallen;* they are thrust down, unable | to rise.—Psalm 36:7–12
Additional Psalm: Psalm 44:1–8

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 5:1–23

Warning Against Adultery

1My son, be attentive to my wisdom; incline your ear to my understanding, 2that you may keep discretion, and your lips may guard knowledge. 3For the lips of a forbidden woman drip honey, and her speech is smoother than oil, 4but in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. 5Her feet go down to death; her steps follow the path to Sheol; 6she does not ponder the path of life; her ways wander, and she does not know it. 7And now, O sons, listen to me, and do not depart from the words of my mouth. 8Keep your way far from her, and do not go near the door of her house, 9lest you give your honor to others and your years to the merciless, 10lest strangers take their fill of your strength, and your labors go to the house of a foreigner, 11and at the end of your life you groan, when your flesh and body are consumed, 12and you say, “How I hated discipline, and my heart despised reproof! 13I did not listen to the voice of my teachers or incline my ear to my instructors. 14I am at the brink of utter ruin in the assembled congregation.” 15Drink water from your own cistern, flowing water from your own well. 16Should your springs be scattered abroad, streams of water in the streets? 17Let them be for yourself alone, and not for strangers with you. 18Let your fountain be blessed, and rejoice in the wife of your youth, 19a lovely deer, a graceful doe. Let her breasts fill you at all times with delight; be intoxicated always in her love. 20Why should you be intoxicated, my son, with a forbidden woman and embrace the bosom of an adulteress? 21For a man’s ways are before the eyes of the LORD, and he ponders all his paths. 22The iniquities of the wicked ensnare him, and he is held fast in the cords of his sin. 23He dies for lack of discipline, and because of his great folly he is led astray. Additional Reading: Proverbs 6:1–7:27

## New Testament Reading: John 12:20–36a

Some Greeks Seek Jesus

20Now among those who went up to worship at the feast were some Greeks. 21So these came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and asked him, “Sir, we wish to see Jesus.” 22Philip went and told Andrew; Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus. 23And Jesus answered them, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. 24Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit. 25Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. 26If anyone serves me, he must follow me; and where I am, there will my servant be also. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.

The Son of Man Must Be Lifted Up

27“Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? But for this purpose I have come to this hour. 28Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came from heaven: “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.” 29The crowd that stood there and heard it said that it had thundered. Others said, “An angel has spoken to him.” 30Jesus answered, “This voice has come for your sake, not mine. 31Now is the judgment of this world; now will the ruler of this world be cast out. 32And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.” 33He said this to show by what kind of death he was going to die. 34So the crowd answered him, “We have heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever. How can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?” 35So Jesus said to them, “The light is among you for a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, lest darkness overtake you. The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going. 36While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light.”

## Writing

Since the mingled cup and the bread that has been made receive the Word of God, and the Eucharist becomes the blood and the body of Christ from which the substance of our flesh is increased and supported, how can they affirm that the flesh is incapable of receiving the gift of God, which is eternal life? And this flesh is nourished from the body and blood of the Lord and is a member of Him. This is exactly what the blessed Paul declares in his Epistle to the Ephesians when he says that “we are members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones” [Eph. 5:30]. He does not say this about some spiritual and invisible person, for a spirit does not have bones or flesh [cf. Luke 24:39]. Rather, he is referring to the time when the Lord became an actual man, consisting of flesh and nerves and bones. Our flesh, then, is nourished by the cup that is His blood and receives increase from the bread that is His body. Just as a cutting from the vine planted in the ground bears fruit in due season or a kernel of wheat falling into the earth and decomposing rises and is multiplied by the Spirit of God who contains all things—and then, through the wisdom of God, serves for our use when, after receiving the Word of God, it becomes the Eucharist that is the body and blood of Christ—in the same way our bodies, being nourished by it and deposited in the earth and suffering decomposition there, shall rise at their appointed time. The Word of God grants them resurrection to the glory of God, even the Father, who freely gives to this mortal immortality and to this corruptible incorruption [1 Cor. 15:53]. This is so because the strength of God is made perfect in weakness [2 Cor. 12:3] in order that we may never become puffed up, as if we had life from ourselves, or become exalted against God with ungrateful minds.—Irenaeus of Lyons

## Hymnody

What these sacrifices promised From a God who sought to bless,
Came at last—a second Adam—Priest and King of Righteousness:
Son of God, incarnate Savior, Son of Man, both Christ and Lord,
Who in naked shame would offer On the cross His blood outpoured. (LSB
572:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful God, Your Son, Jesus Christ, was lifted high upon the cross that He might bear the sins of the world and draw all people to Himself. Grant that we who glory in His death for our redemption may faithfully heed His call to bear the cross and follow Him, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F27)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Small Catechism Part III

## III. THE LORD’S PRAYER

Our Father who art in heaven.

What does this mean?

Answer: By these words God would tenderly encourage us to believe that He is our true Father and that we are His true children, so that we may ask Him confidently with all assurance, as dear children ask their dear father.

THE FIRST PETITION

Hallowed be Thy name.

What does this mean?

Answer: God’s name is indeed holy in itself. But we pray in this petition that it may become holy among us also.

How is this done?

Answer: When the Word of God is taught in its truth and purity and we as the children of God also lead holy lives in accordance with it. To this end help us, dear Father in heaven. But anyone who teaches and lives other than by what God’s Word teaches profanes the name of God among us. From this preserve us, heavenly Father.

THE SECOND PETITION

Thy kingdom come.

What does this mean?

Answer: The kingdom of God comes indeed without our prayer, of itself. But we pray in this petition that it may come to us also.

How is this done?

Answer: When our heavenly Father gives us His Holy Spirit, so that by His grace we believe His holy Word and lead a godly life here in time and there in eternity.

THE THIRD PETITION

Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

What does this mean?

Answer: The good and gracious will of God is done indeed without our prayer. But we pray in this petition that it may be done among us also.

How is this done?

Answer: When God breaks and hinders every evil counsel and will that would not let us hallow the name of God nor let His kingdom come, such as the will of the devil, the world, and our flesh. Instead, He strengthens and keeps us steadfast in His Word and in faith until we die. This is His gracious and good will.

THE FOURTH PETITION

Give us this day our daily bread.

What does this mean?

Answer: God gives daily bread, even without our prayer, to all wicked people; but we pray in this petition that He would lead us to realize this and to receive our daily bread with thanksgiving.

What is meant by daily bread?

Answer: Everything that belongs to the support and needs of the body, such as food, drink, clothing, shoes, house, home, field, cattle, money, goods, a pious spouse, pious children, pious servants, pious and faithful rulers, good government, good weather, peace, health, discipline, honor, good friends, faithful neighbors, and the like.

THE FIFTH PETITION

And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.

What does this mean?

Answer: We pray in this petition that our Father in heaven would not look upon our sins nor deny such petitions on account of them. We are not worthy of any of the things for which we pray, neither have we deserved them. But we pray that He would grant them all to us by grace. For we daily sin much and indeed deserve nothing but punishment. So will we truly, on our part, also heartily forgive and readily do good to those who sin against us.

THE SIXTH PETITION

And lead us not into temptation.

What does this mean?

Answer: God indeed tempts no one. But we pray in this petition that God would guard and keep us, so that the devil, the world, and our flesh may not deceive us nor seduce us into false blief, despair, and other great shame and vice. Though we are attacked by these things, we pray that still we may finally overcome them and gain the victory.

THE SEVENTH PETITION

But deliver us from evil.

What does this mean?

Answer: We pray in this petition, as in a summary, that our Father in heaven would deliver us from all kinds of evil, of body and soul, property and honor. And finally, when our last hour shall come, we pray that He would grant us a blessed end and graciously take us from this vale of tears to Himself into heaven.

Amen.

What does this mean?

Answer: I should be certain that these petitions are acceptable to our Father in heaven and are heard by Him. For He Himself has commanded us to pray this way and has promised that He will hear us. Amen, Amen; that is, “Yes, yes, it shall be so.”

[Note: ”For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever” did not appear in Luther’s Small Catechism.]
