# June 2

## Psalmody

3When my enemies | turn back,* they stumble and perish before your | presence. 4For you have maintained my | just cause;* you have sat on the throne, giving righteous | judgment. 5You have rebuked the nations; you have made the wicked | perish;* you have blotted out their name forever and | ever. 6The enemy came to an end in everlasting ruins; their cities you | rooted out;* the very memory of them has | perished. 13Be gracious to me, | O LORD!* See my affliction from those who hate me, O you who lift me up from the | gates of death, 14that I may recount all your | praises,* that in the gates of the daughter of Zion I may rejoice in your sal- | vation.—Psalm 9:3–6, 13–14
Additional Psalm: Psalm 23

## Old Testament Reading: Ecclesiastes 10:1–20

[Wisdom Better than Folly]

1Dead flies make the perfumer’s ointment give off a stench; so a little folly outweighs wisdom and honor. 2A wise man’s heart inclines him to the right, but a fool’s heart to the left. 3Even when the fool walks on the road, he lacks sense, and he says to everyone that he is a fool. 4If the anger of the ruler rises against you, do not leave your place, for calmness will lay great offenses to rest. 5There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, as it were an error proceeding from the ruler: 6folly is set in many high places, and the rich sit in a low place. 7I have seen slaves on horses, and princes walking on the ground like slaves. 8He who digs a pit will fall into it, and a serpent will bite him who breaks through a wall. 9He who quarries stones is hurt by them, and he who splits logs is endangered by them. 10If the iron is blunt, and one does not sharpen the edge, he must use more strength, but wisdom helps one to succeed. 11If the serpent bites before it is charmed, there is no advantage to the charmer. 12The words of a wise man’s mouth win him favor, but the lips of a fool consume him. 13The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the end of his talk is evil madness. 14A fool multiplies words, though no man knows what is to be, and who can tell him what will be after him? 15The toil of a fool wearies him, for he does not know the way to the city. 16Woe to you, O land, when your king is a child, and your princes feast in the morning! 17Happy are you, O land, when your king is the son of the nobility, and your princes feast at the proper time, for strength, and not for drunkenness! 18Through sloth the roof sinks in, and through indolence the house leaks. 19Bread is made for laughter, and wine gladdens life, and money answers everything. 20Even in your thoughts, do not curse the king, nor in your bedroom curse the rich, for a bird of the air will carry your voice, or some winged creature tell the matter.

## New Testament Reading: John 10:1–21

I Am the Good Shepherd

1“Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the door but climbs in by another way, that man is a thief and a robber. 2But he who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. 3To him the gatekeeper opens. The sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. 4When he has brought out all his own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. 5A stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him, for they do not know the voice of strangers.” 6This figure of speech Jesus used with them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them. 7So Jesus again said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep. 8All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. 9I am the door. If anyone enters by me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture. 10The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life and have it abundantly. 11I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. 12He who is a hired hand and not a shepherd, who does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf snatches them and scatters them. 13He flees because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep. 14I am the good shepherd. I know my own and my own know me, 15just as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep. 16And I have other sheep that are not of this fold. I must bring them also, and they will listen to my voice. So there will be one flock, one shepherd. 17For this reason the Father loves me, because I lay down my life that I may take it up again. 18No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it up again. This charge I have received from my Father.” 19There was again a division among the Jews because of these words. 20Many of them said, “He has a demon, and is insane; why listen to him?” 21Others said, “These are not the words of one who is oppressed by a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?”

## Writing

The entire Holy Trinity—God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—directs all people to Christ, as to the Book of Life, in whom they should seek the Father’s eternal election. For this has been decided by the Father from eternity: whom He would save He would save through Christ. Christ Himself says, “No one comes to the Father except through Me” (John 14:6). And again, “I am the door. If anyone enters by Me, he will be saved” (John 10:9). ’s olid Declaration of the Formula of Concord XI 66 It is not only necessary that the pure, wholesome doctrine be rightly presented for the preservation of pure doctrine and for thorough, permanent, godly unity in the Church, but it is also necessary that the opponents who teach otherwise be reproved (1 Timothy 3; [2 Timothy 3:16;] Titus 1:9). Faithful shepherds, as Luther says, should do both things: (a) feed or nourish the lambs and (b) resist the wolves. Then the sheep may flee from strange voices (John 10:5–12) and may separate the precious from the worthless (Jeremiah 15:19). ’s olid Declaration of the Formula of Concord, Summary, Foundation, Rule, and Norm 14 Thank God, ‹today› a seven-year-old child knows what the Church is, namely, the holy believers and lambs who hear the voice of their Shepherd [John 10:11–16]. For the children pray, “I believe in one holy Christian Church.” This holiness [comes] … from God’s Word and true faith. ’s malcald Articles III XII 2–3

## Hymnody

O God, let us hear when our Shepherd shall call In accents persuasive and
tender,
That while there is time we make haste, one and all, And find Him, our
mighty defender. Have mercy upon us, O Jesus! (LSB 510:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, merciful Father, since You have wakened from death the Shepherd of Your sheep, grant us Your Holy Spirit that when we hear the voice of our Shepherd we may know Him who calls us each by name and follow where He leads; through the same Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L43)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Doctors and Preachers Who Subscribed to the Augsburg Confession and Apology AD 1537

## Doctors and Preachers Who Subscribed to the Augsburg Confession and Apology, A.D. 1537

According to the command of the most illustrious princes and of the orders and states professing the doctrine of the Gospel, we have reread the articles of the Confession presented to the Emperor in the Assembly at Augsburg. By God’s favor, all the preachers who have been present in this Assembly at Smalcald harmoniously declare that they believe and teach in their churches according to the articles of the Confession and Apology. They also declare that they approve the article about the primacy of the pope and his power, and the power and jurisdiction of bishops, which was presented to the princes in this assembly at Smalcald. So they subscribe their names.

[1] I, Doctor John Bugenhagen, Pomeranus, subscribe the Articles of the Augsburg Confession, the Apology, and the Article presented to the princes at Smalcald concerning the papacy.

[2] I also, Doctor Urban Rhegius, Superintendent of the Churches in the Duchy of Lüneburg, subscribe.

[3] Nicholas Amsdorf of Magdeburg subscribed.

[4] George Spalatin of Altenburg subscribed.

[5] I, Andreas Osiander, subscribe.

[6] Magister Veit Dietrich of Nürnberg subscribed.

[7] Stephen Agricola, Minister at Hof, subscribed with his own hand.

[8] John Draconites of Marburg subscribed.

[9] Conrad Figenbotz subscribed to all throughout.

[10] Martin Bucer.

[11] I, Erhard Schnepf, subscribe.

[12] Paul Rhodius, Preacher in Stettin.

[13] Gerhard Öniken, Minister of the Church at Minden.

[14] Brixius Northanus, Minister at Söst.

[15] Simon Schneeweiss, Pastor of Crailsheim.

[16] I, Pomeranus, again subscribe in the name of Schoolmaster John Brenz, as he ordered me.

[17] Philip Melanchthon subscribes with his own hand.

[18] Anthony Corvinus subscribes with his own hand, as well as in the name of Adam [Krafft] of Fulda.

[19] John Schlaginhaufen subscribes with his own hand.

[20] Schoolmaster George Helt of Forchheim.

[21] Michael Cölius, Preacher at Mansfeld.

[22] Peter Geltner, Preacher of the church of Frankfurt.

[23] Dionysius Melander subscribed.

[24] Paul Fagius of Strasbourg.

[25] Wendel Faber, Pastor of Seeburg in Mansfeld.

[26] Conrad Ötinger of Pforzheim, Preacher of Ulrich, Duke of Württemberg.

[27] Boniface Wolfart, Minister of the Word of the Church at Augsburg.

[28] John Aepinus, Superintendent of Hamburg, subscribed with his own hand.

[29] John [Tieman] of Amsterdam of Bremen does the same.

[30] John Fontanus, Superintendent of Lower Hesse, subscribed.

[31] Frederick Myconius subscribed for himself and Justus Menius.

[32] Ambrose Blaurer.

I have read, and again and again reread, the Confession and Apology presented at Augsburg by the Most Illustrious Prince, the Elector of Saxony, and by the other princes and estates of the Roman Empire, to his Imperial Majesty. I have also read the Formula of Concord concerning the Sacrament, made at Wittenberg with Dr. Bucer and others. I have also read the articles written at the Assembly at Smalcald in the German language by Dr. Martin Luther, our most revered teacher, and the tract concerning the Papacy and the Power and Jurisdiction of Bishops. In my humble opinion I judge that all these agree with Holy Scripture and with the belief of the true and genuine catholic Church. But although I am in so great a number of most learned men who have now assembled at Smalcald, I acknowledge that I am the least of all. Yet, as I am not permitted to await the end of the assembly, I ask you, most renowned man, Dr. John Bugenhagen, most revered Father in Christ, that your courtesy may add my name, if it be necessary, to all that I have above mentioned. For I testify in this my own handwriting that I thus hold, confess, and constantly will teach, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.

John Brenz, Minister of Hall.Done at Smalcald,February 23, 1537.
