# June 9

## Psalmody

10Then I said, “I will ap- | peal to this,* to the years of the right hand of the | Most High.” 11I will remember the deeds | of the LORD;* yes, I will remember your won- | ders of old. 12I will ponder | all your work,* and meditate on your | mighty deeds. 13Your way, O God, is | holy.* What god is great | like our God? 14You are the God who works | wonders;* you have made known your might among the | peoples. 15You with your arm redeemed your | people,* the children of Jacob and | Joseph.—Psalm 77:10–15
Additional Psalm: Psalm 106

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 8:1–21

The Blessings of Wisdom

1Does not wisdom call? Does not understanding raise her voice? 2On the heights beside the way, at the crossroads she takes her stand; 3beside the gates in front of the town, at the entrance of the portals she cries aloud: 4“To you, O men, I call, and my cry is to the children of man. 5O simple ones, learn prudence; O fools, learn sense. 6Hear, for I will speak noble things, and from my lips will come what is right, 7for my mouth will utter truth; wickedness is an abomination to my lips. 8All the words of my mouth are righteous; there is nothing twisted or crooked in them. 9They are all straight to him who understands, and right to those who find knowledge. 10Take my instruction instead of silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold, 11for wisdom is better than jewels, and all that you may desire cannot compare with her. 12“I, wisdom, dwell with prudence, and I find knowledge and discretion. 13The fear of the LORD is hatred of evil. Pride and arrogance and the way of evil and perverted speech I hate. 14I have counsel and sound wisdom; I have insight; I have strength. 15By me kings reign, and rulers decree what is just; 16by me princes rule, and nobles, all who govern justly. 17I love those who love me, and those who seek me diligently find me. 18Riches and honor are with me, enduring wealth and righteousness. 19My fruit is better than gold, even fine gold, and my yield than choice silver. 20I walk in the way of righteousness, in the paths of justice, 21granting an inheritance to those who love me, and filling their treasuries.”

## New Testament Reading: John 12:36b–50

The Unbelief of the People

36bWhen Jesus had said these things, he departed and hid himself from them. 37Though he had done so many signs before them, they still did not believe in him, 38so that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled: “Lord, who has believed what he heard from us, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?” 39Therefore they could not believe. For again Isaiah said, 40“He has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, lest they see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and turn, and I would heal them.” 41Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke of him. 42Nevertheless, many even of the authorities believed in him, but for fear of the Pharisees they did not confess it, so that they would not be put out of the synagogue; 43for they loved the glory that comes from man more than the glory that comes from God.

Jesus Came to Save the World

44And Jesus cried out and said, “Whoever believes in me, believes not in me but in him who sent me. 45And whoever sees me sees him who sent me. 46I have come into the world as light, so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness. 47If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the world but to save the world. 48The one who rejects me and does not receive my words has a judge; the word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day. 49For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment—what to say and what to speak. 50And I know that his commandment is eternal life. What I say, therefore, I say as the Father has told me.”

## Writing

“Ibrahim?” [said the Knight to his Muslim servant.] “What are you thinking about?” “Paradise, my lord … and God… He is one…. He is exalted, higher than the heavens, incomprehensible, glorious beyond all understanding, impossible to grasp… If we could understand him, he would no longer be God. And if he could become like us, he would not be God either. We would never dare to say that the Infinitely Exalted would have a son with a woman, that the Glory and the Divinity, the holy, inexpressible whom we cannot find words for … that this one should be found in a miserable, sweaty, human body, which can get sores and colic, which must stuff itself with porridge and must relieve itself as we do. This is blasphemy. Therefore God gives us victory….” [Injured, on his deathbed, and far from home, the Knight] closed his eyes and … folded his hands. A great peace came over him. He knew that he was not alone. He knew this without needing to clothe it with words. There was someone here who walked amid the hospital beds, just like in the streets of Capernaum. This one stopped and bowed down. His breast, too, had a large wound. His hands bled. One could tell that he knew everything that those at home would never understand. He, too, had experienced it: cold and rain, filth and vermin, beatings and wounds, fear of death and defeat. The God who had come down into all this, he was very near. It was good to have such a God.—Bo Giertz

## Hymnody

Amen, Lord Jesus, grant our prayer;
Great Captain, now Thine arm make bare, Fight for us once again!
So shall Thy saints and martyrs raise
A mighty chorus to Thy praise Forevermore. Amen. (LSB 666:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, grant that the birth of Your only-begotten Son in the flesh may set us free from the bondage of sin; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L08)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Small Catechism Part IV
