# June 15

## Psalmody

1Have mercy on me, O God, according to your | steadfast love;* according to your abundant mercy blot out my trans- | gressions. 2Wash me thoroughly from my in- | iquity,* and cleanse me | from my sin! 3For I know my trans- | gressions,* and my sin is ever be- | fore me. 4Against you, you only, have I sinned and done what is evil | in your sight,* so that you may be justified in your words and blameless in your | judgment. 5Behold, I was brought forth in in- | iquity,* and in sin did my mother con- | ceive me. 6Behold, you delight in truth in the inward | being,* and you teach me wisdom in the | secret heart. 7Purge me with hyssop, and I | shall be clean;* wash me, and I shall be whit- | er than snow. 8Let me hear joy and | gladness;* let the bones that you have bro- | ken rejoice. 9Hide your face | from my sins,* and blot out all my in- | iquities. 10Create in me a clean heart, | O God,* and renew a right spirit with- | in me. 11Cast me not away from your | presence,* and take not your Holy Spirit | from me. 12Restore to me the joy of your sal- | vation,* and uphold me with a willing | spirit.—Psalm 51:1–12
Additional Psalm: Psalm 10

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 15:1–29

[The Proverbs of Solomon]

1A soft answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs up anger. 2The tongue of the wise commends knowledge, but the mouths of fools pour out folly. 3The eyes of the LORD are in every place, keeping watch on the evil and the good. 4A gentle tongue is a tree of life, but perverseness in it breaks the spirit. 5A fool despises his father’s instruction, but whoever heeds reproof is prudent. 6In the house of the righteous there is much treasure, but trouble befalls the income of the wicked. 7The lips of the wise spread knowledge; not so the hearts of fools. 8The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD, but the prayer of the upright is acceptable to him. 9The way of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD, but he loves him who pursues righteousness. 10There is severe discipline for him who forsakes the way; whoever hates reproof will die. 11Sheol and Abaddon lie open before the LORD; how much more the hearts of the children of man! 12A scoffer does not like to be reproved; he will not go to the wise. 13A glad heart makes a cheerful face, but by sorrow of heart the spirit is crushed. 14The heart of him who has understanding seeks knowledge, but the mouths of fools feed on folly. 15All the days of the afflicted are evil, but the cheerful of heart has a continual feast. 16Better is a little with the fear of the LORD than great treasure and trouble with it. 17Better is a dinner of herbs where love is than a fattened ox and hatred with it. 18A hot-tempered man stirs up strife, but he who is slow to anger quiets contention. 19The way of a sluggard is like a hedge of thorns, but the path of the upright is a level highway. 20A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish man despises his mother. 21Folly is a joy to him who lacks sense, but a man of understanding walks straight ahead. 22Without counsel plans fail, but with many advisers they succeed. 23To make an apt answer is a joy to a man, and a word in season, how good it is! 24The path of life leads upward for the prudent, that he may turn away from Sheol beneath. 25The LORD tears down the house of the proud but maintains the widow’s boundaries. 26The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the LORD, but gracious words are pure. 27Whoever is greedy for unjust gain troubles his own household, but he who hates bribes will live. 28The heart of the righteous ponders how to answer, but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things. 29The LORD is far from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous.

## New Testament Reading: John 15:12–27

[Jesus, speaking to his disciples, said:] 12“This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you. 13Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends. 14You are my friends if you do what I command you. 15No longer do I call you servants, for the servant does not know what his master is doing; but I have called you friends, for all that I have heard from my Father I have made known to you. 16You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit and that your fruit should abide, so that whatever you ask the Father in my name, he may give it to you. 17These things I command you, so that you will love one another.

The Hatred of the World

18“If the world hates you, know that it has hated me before it hated you. 19If you were of the world, the world would love you as its own; but because you are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. 20Remember the word that I said to you: ‘A servant is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will also keep yours. 21But all these things they will do to you on account of my name, because they do not know him who sent me. 22If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have been guilty of sin, but now they have no excuse for their sin. 23Whoever hates me hates my Father also. 24If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin, but now they have seen and hated both me and my Father. 25But the word that is written in their Law must be fulfilled: ‘They hated me without a cause.’ 26“But when the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will bear witness about me. 27And you also will bear witness, because you have been with me from the beginning.”

## Writing

The Sundays during the Pentecost cycle develop three great themes. The first is Baptism and its graces. We are baptized and grounded in the graces of Baptism. Every Sunday is a reminder of Baptism and a small Easter. The second theme is preparation for the second advent of the Lord. It is treated in detail on the final Sundays of the season. The remaining theme, the burden of the Sundays midway after Pentecost, may be summarized as the conflict between the two camps. Although we are placed in the kingdom of God, we remain surrounded by the kingdom of the world. Our souls are laboring under Adam’s wretched legacy and waver continually to and fro between two allegiances. By these three great themes the liturgy covers the whole range of Christian life. In Baptism the precious treasure of the Spirit was conferred. Through it we are God’s children and may call God Father. Through it we have become temples of the Holy Spirit, heirs and brothers of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, Baptism has not translated us to a paradise without toil or trouble. Rather, we are sent out into a troubled world to work and struggle. We must guard the holy land of our souls against hostile attack. We must learn to know and conquer the enemy, and such is the task that will continue until we have taken our final breaths. The Church serves as both the heroine, who teaches us the art of warfare, and our strong fortress and shield in the conflict. Through Holy Communion, she bestows aid that repeatedly frees the soul from the entanglements of temptation. How does she do this? Courage and strength and perseverance flow from the Word of God in the Service of the Word, and they flow in even fuller measure from Holy Communion. Of ourselves we are helpless creatures, wholly unable to withstand the attack, but in Holy Communion another battles for us. The Mightier, Christ, vanquishes the mighty. By means of Holy Communion, we are enrolled in our Captain’s forces. And thus Christ’s battle becomes our battle and His triumph our triumph, and His wondrous strength renders us invincible.—Pius Parsch

## Hymnody

The world against me rages, Its fury I disdain;
Though bitter war it wages, Its work is all in vain.
My heart from care is free,
No trouble troubles me. Misfortune now is play, And night is bright as day.
(LSB 467:5)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, the giver of all that is good, by Your holy inspiration grant that we may think those things that are right and by Your merciful guiding accomplish them; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L46)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession Preface 1–11

[1] Most invincible Emperor, Caesar Augustus, most clement Lord: Your Imperial Majesty has summoned a meeting of the Empire here at Augsburg to consider taking action against the Turk, discussing how best to stand effectively against his fury and attacks by means of military force. The Turk is the most atrocious and ancient hereditary enemy of the Christian name and religion.

[2]This meeting is also to consider disagreements in our holy religion, the Christian faith, by hearing everyone’s opinions and judgments in each other’s presence. They are to be considered and evaluated among ourselves in mutual charity, mercy, and kindness.

[3] After the removal and correction of things that either side has understood differently, these matters may be settled and brought back to one simple truth and Christian concord.

[4] Then we may embrace and maintain the future of one pure and true religion under one Christ, doing battle under Him [Psalm 24:8], living in unity and concord in the one Christian Church.

[5] We, the undersigned elector and princes, have been called to this gathering along with other electors, princes, and estates in obedient compliance with the Imperial mandate. Therefore, we have promptly come to Augsburg. We do not mean to boast when we say this, but we were among the first to be here.

[6] At the very beginning of the meeting in Augsburg, Your Imperial Majesty made a proposal to the electors, princes, and other estates of the Empire. Among other things, you asked that the several estates of the Empire—on the strength of the Imperial edict—should submit their explanations, opinions, and judgments in German and Latin.

[7] On the following Wednesday, we informed Your Imperial Majesty that after due deliberation we would present the articles of our Confession in one week.

[8] Therefore, concerning this religious matter, we offer this Confession. It is ours and our preachers’. It shows, from the Holy Scriptures and God’s pure Word, what has been up to this time presented in our lands, dukedoms, dominions, and cities, and taught in our churches.

[9] In keeping with your edict, the other electors, princes, and estates of the Empire may present similar writings, in Latin and German, giving their opinions in this religious matter.

[10] We, and those princes previously mentioned, are prepared to discuss, in a friendly manner, all possible ways and means by which we may come together. We will do this in the presence of your Imperial Majesty, our most clement Lord. In this way, dissensions may be put away without offensive conflict. This can be done honorably, with God’s help, so that we may be brought back to agreement and concord.

[11] As your edict shows, we are all under one Christ and do battle under Him [Exodus 15:3]. We ought to confess the one Christ and do everything according to God’s truth. With the most fervent prayers, this is what we ask of God.
