# June 14

## Psalmody

1Shout for joy to God, | all the earth;* 2sing the glory of his name; give to him | glorious praise! 3Say to God, “How awesome | are your deeds!* So great is your power that your enemies come cringing | to you. 4All the earth worships you and sings prais- | es to you;* they sing praises | to your name.” 5Come and see what | God has done:* he is awesome in his deeds toward the chil- | dren of man. 6He turned the sea into | dry land;* they passed through the riv- | er on foot. There did we rejoice in him, 7who rules by his might forever, whose eyes keep watch on the | nations—* let not the rebellious ex- | alt themselves. 8Bless our God, O | peoples;* let the sound of his | praise be heard,—Psalm 66:1–8
Additional Psalm: Psalm 66

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 14:1–27

[The Proverbs of Solomon]

1The wisest of women builds her house, but folly with her own hands tears it down. 2Whoever walks in uprightness fears the LORD, but he who is devious in his ways despises him. 3By the mouth of a fool comes a rod for his back, but the lips of the wise will preserve them. 4Where there are no oxen, the manger is clean, but abundant crops come by the strength of the ox. 5A faithful witness does not lie, but a false witness breathes out lies. 6A scoffer seeks wisdom in vain, but knowledge is easy for a man of understanding. 7Leave the presence of a fool, for there you do not meet words of knowledge. 8The wisdom of the prudent is to discern his way, but the folly of fools is deceiving. 9Fools mock at the guilt offering, but the upright enjoy acceptance. 10The heart knows its own bitterness, and no stranger shares its joy. 11The house of the wicked will be destroyed, but the tent of the upright will flourish. 12There is a way that seems right to a man, but its end is the way to death. 13Even in laughter the heart may ache, and the end of joy may be grief. 14The backslider in heart will be filled with the fruit of his ways, and a good man will be filled with the fruit of his ways. 15The simple believes everything, but the prudent gives thought to his steps. 16One who is wise is cautious and turns away from evil, but a fool is reckless and careless. 17A man of quick temper acts foolishly, and a man of evil devices is hated. 18The simple inherit folly, but the prudent are crowned with knowledge. 19The evil bow down before the good, the wicked at the gates of the righteous. 20The poor is disliked even by his neighbor, but the rich has many friends. 21Whoever despises his neighbor is a sinner, but blessed is he who is generous to the poor. 22Do they not go astray who devise evil? Those who devise good meet steadfast love and faithfulness. 23In all toil there is profit, but mere talk tends only to poverty. 24The crown of the wise is their wealth, but the folly of fools brings folly. 25A truthful witness saves lives, but one who breathes out lies is deceitful. 26In the fear of the LORD one has strong confidence, and his children will have a refuge. 27The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life, that one may turn away from the snares of death.

## New Testament Reading: John 15:1–11

I Am the True Vine

1“I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser. 2Every branch in me that does not bear fruit he takes away, and every branch that does bear fruit he prunes, that it may bear more fruit. 3Already you are clean because of the word that I have spoken to you. 4Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit by itself, unless it abides in the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in me. 5I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever abides in me and I in him, he it is that bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing. 6If anyone does not abide in me he is thrown away like a branch and withers; and the branches are gathered, thrown into the fire, and burned. 7If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be done for you. 8By this my Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit and so prove to be my disciples. 9As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Abide in my love. 10If you keep my commandments, you will abide in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commandments and abide in his love. 11These things I have spoken to you, that my joy may be in you, and that your joy may be full.”

## Writing

Elisha was a prophet who governed the Church, promoted the study of doctrine, and gave many political counsels to the kings of Israel. He governed among the people of God for more than eighty years… He came from the town of Abel-meholah, and was called from the plow to the prophetic office (1 Kings 19). He was a faithful and diligent disciple and successor of the prophet Elijah. When Elijah was about to ascend into heaven, Elisha asked for a double portion of his spirit, or the gifts necessary for managing Church and school among the people of God with a great and cheerful mind (2 Kings 2)… He brought aid to a widow and poor orphan vexed by creditors with a never-ending flask of oil (2 Kings 4), and he raised the son of the Shunammite (2 Kings 4). He made the bitter waters healthy by sprinkling salt in Jericho (2 Kings 2); by this image, he at the same time showed that the roots of doctrine and virtue are bitter, but when God blesses and the salt of wisdom seasons, the fruits are most sweet. He provided for one hundred scholars in Gilgal at the time of famine, with the meager provisions of herbs of the field and wild gourds, whose bitterness he took away by pouring in the flour of the Word and divine promises (2 Kings 4). He cleansed Naaman the Syrian from his leprosy and punished his greedy and lying servant Gehazi with the same misfortune (2 Kings 5). He made the iron of the ax that fell into the Jordan river to float on the surface of the water (2 Kings 6)… Finally, in sickness he prophesied concerning the victories of Joash, king of Israel, and he died (2 Kings 13). When the body of a traveler who was killed by robbers was cast into Elisha’s grave, the traveler came back to life (Sirach 48).—David Chytraeus

## Hymnody

Chief of sinners though I be, Jesus shed His blood for me, Died that I might
live on high, Lives that I might never die. As the branch is to the vine, I am
His, and He is mine.

—Chief of Sinners Though I Be (LSB 611:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, through the prophet Elisha, You continued the prophetic pattern of teaching Your people the true faith and demonstrating through miracles Your presence in creation to heal it of its brokenness. Grant that Your Church may see in Your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the final end-times prophet whose teaching and miracles continue in Your Church through the healing medicine of the Gospel and the Sacraments; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1038) Elisha Elisha, son of Shaphat of the tribe of Issachar, was the prophet of God to the Northern Kingdom of Israel around 849–786 BC. Upon seeing his mentor, Elijah, taken up into heaven, Elisha assumed the prophetic office and took up the mantle of his predecessor. Like Elijah, Elisha played an active role in political affairs. He also performed many miracles, such as curing the Syrian army commander Naaman of his leprosy (2 Kings 5) and restoring life to the son of a Shunammite woman (2 Kings 4:8–37). A vocal opponent of Baal worship, Elisha lived up to his name, which means “my God is salvation.”

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Small Catechism Table of Duties: for husbands through for all in common

FOR HUSBANDS

Likewise, husbands, live with your wives in an understanding way, showing honor to the woman as the weaker vessel, since they are heirs with you of the grace of life, so that your prayers may not be hindered. (1 Peter 3:7)

Husbands, love your wives, and do not be harsh with them. (Colossians 3:19)

FOR WIVES

Wives, submit to your own husbands, as to the Lord.

For this is how the holy women who hoped in God used to adorn themselves, by submitting to their husbands, as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. And you are her children, if you do good and do not fear anything that is frightening. (Ephesians 5:22; 1 Peter 3:5–6)

FOR PARENTS

Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. (Ephesians 6:4)

FOR CHILDREN

Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. “Honor your father and mother” (this is the first commandment with a promise), “that it may go well with you and that you may live long in the land.” (Ephesians 6:1–3)

FOR MALE AND FEMALE SERVANTS, HIRED MEN, AND LABORERS

Slaves, obey your earthly masters with fear and trembling, with a sincere heart, as you would Christ, not by the way of eye-service, as people-pleasers, but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, rendering service with a good will as to the Lord and not to man, knowing that whatever good anyone does, this he will receive back from the Lord, whether he is a slave or free. (Ephesians 6:5–8; see also Colossians 3:22)

FOR MASTERS AND MISTRESSES

Masters, do the same to them, and stop your threatening, knowing that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and that there is no partiality with Him. (Ephesians 6:9; see also Colossians 4:1)

FOR YOUNG PERSONS IN GENERAL

Likewise, you who are younger, be subject to the elders. Clothe yourselves, all of you, with humility toward one another, for “God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.” Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God so that at the proper time he may exalt you. (1 Peter 5:5–6)

FOR WIDOWS

She who is truly a widow, left all alone, has set her hope on God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day, but she who is self-indulgent is dead even while she lives. (1 Timothy 5:5–6)

FOR ALL IN COMMON

The commandments . . . are summed up in this word: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” (Romans 13:9) “First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all people.” (1 Timothy 2:1)

Let each his lesson learn with care, and all the household well shall fare.
