# June 19

## Psalmody

9Be gracious to me, O LORD, for I am | in distress;* my eye is wasted from grief; my soul and my body | also. 10For my life is spent with sorrow, and my years with | sighing;* my strength fails because of my iniquity, and my bones | waste away. 14But I trust in you, | O LORD;* I say, “You | are my God.” 15My times are | in your hand;* rescue me from the hand of my enemies and from my perse- | cutors! 16Make your face shine on your | servant;* save me in your | steadfast love! 17O LORD, let me not be put to shame, for I call up- | on you;* let the wicked be put to shame; let them go silently | to Sheol. 18Let the lying | lips be mute,* which speak insolently against the righteous in pride | and contempt. 19Oh, how abundant is your goodness, which you have stored up for those who | fear you* and worked for those who take refuge in you, in the sight of the children of | mankind!—Psalm 31:9–10, 14–19
Additional Psalm: Psalm 102

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 22:1–21

[The Proverbs of Solomon]

1A good name is to be chosen rather than great riches, and favor is better than silver or gold. 2The rich and the poor meet together; the LORD is the maker of them all. 3The prudent sees danger and hides himself, but the simple go on and suffer for it. 4The reward for humility and fear of the LORD is riches and honor and life. 5Thorns and snares are in the way of the crooked; whoever guards his soul will keep far from them. 6Train up a child in the way he should go; even when he is old he will not depart from it. 7The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is the slave of the lender. 8Whoever sows injustice will reap calamity, and the rod of his fury will fail. 9Whoever has a bountiful eye will be blessed, for he shares his bread with the poor. 10Drive out a scoffer, and strife will go out, and quarreling and abuse will cease. 11He who loves purity of heart, and whose speech is gracious, will have the king as his friend. 12The eyes of the LORD keep watch over knowledge, but he overthrows the words of the traitor. 13The sluggard says, “There is a lion outside! I shall be killed in the streets!” 14The mouth of forbidden women is a deep pit; he with whom the LORD is angry will fall into it. 15Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of discipline drives it far from him. 16Whoever oppresses the poor to increase his own wealth, or gives to the rich, will only come to poverty.

Words of the Wise

17Incline your ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply your heart to my knowledge, 18for it will be pleasant if you keep them within you, if all of them are ready on your lips. 19That your trust may be in the LORD, I have made them known to you today, even to you. 20Have I not written for you thirty sayings of counsel and knowledge, 21to make you know what is right and true, that you may give a true answer to those who sent you?

## New Testament Reading: John 18:1–14

Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus

1When Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his disciples across the Kidron Valley, where there was a garden, which he and his disciples entered. 2Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples. 3So Judas, having procured a band of soldiers and some officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, went there with lanterns and torches and weapons. 4Then Jesus, knowing all that would happen to him, came forward and said to them, “Whom do you seek?” 5They answered him, “Jesus of Nazareth.” Jesus said to them, “I am he.” Judas, who betrayed him, was standing with them. 6When Jesus said to them, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground. 7So he asked them again, “Whom do you seek?” And they said, “Jesus of Nazareth.” 8Jesus answered, “I told you that I am he. So, if you seek me, let these men go.” 9This was to fulfill the word that he had spoken: “Of those whom you gave me I have lost not one.” 10Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant and cut off his right ear. (The servant’s name was Malchus.) 11So Jesus said to Peter, “Put your sword into its sheath; shall I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”

Jesus Faces Annas and Caiaphas

12So the band of soldiers and their captain and the officers of the Jews arrested Jesus and bound him. 13First they led him to Annas, for he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. 14It was Caiaphas who had advised the Jews that it would be expedient that one man should die for the people.

## Writing

Now when God sends forth his holy gospel he deals with us in a twofold manner, first outwardly, then inwardly. Outwardly he deals with us through the oral word of the gospel and through material signs, that is, baptism and the sacrament of the altar. Inwardly he deals with us through the Holy Spirit, faith, and other gifts. But whatever their measure or order the outward factors should and must precede. The inward experience follows and is effected by the outward. God has determined to give the inward to no one except through the outward. For he wants to give no one the Spirit or faith outside of the outward Word and sign instituted by him, as he says in Luke 16[:29], “Let them hear Moses and the prophets.” Accordingly Paul can call baptism a “washing of regeneration” wherein God “richly pours out the Holy Spirit” [Titus 3:5]. And the oral gospel “is the power of God for salvation to everyone who has faith” (Rom. 1[:16]). Observe carefully, my brother, this order, for everything depends on it.
—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

For us by wickedness betrayed, For us, in crown of thorns arrayed, He bore
the shameful cross and death; For us He gave His dying breath. (LSB 544:5)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, graciously behold this Your family for whom our Lord Jesus Christ was willing to be betrayed and delivered into the hands of sinful men to suffer death upon the cross; through the same Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L33)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession V–VI
