# June 18

## Psalmody

9All the nations you have made shall come and worship before you, | O Lord,* and shall glori- | fy your name. 10For you are great and do | wondrous things;* you a- | lone are God. 11Teach me your way, O LORD, that I may walk | in your truth;* unite my heart to | fear your name. 12I give thanks to you, O Lord my God, with | my whole heart,* and I will glorify your name for- | ever. 13For great is your steadfast | love toward me;* you have delivered my soul from the depths | of Sheol. 14O God, insolent men have risen up against me; a band of ruthless men | seek my life,* and they do not set you be- | fore them. 15But you, O Lord, are a God merciful and | gracious,* slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love and | faithfulness. 16Turn to me and be gra- | cious to me;* give your strength to your servant, and save the son of your maid- | servant. 17Show me a sign of your | favor,* that those who hate me may see and be put to shame because you, LORD, have helped me and com- | forted me.—Psalm 86:9–17
Additional Psalm: Psalm 86

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 20:5–25

[The Proverbs of Solomon]

5The purpose in a man’s heart is like deep water, but a man of understanding will draw it out. 6Many a man proclaims his own steadfast love, but a faithful man who can find? 7The righteous who walks in his integrity—blessed are his children after him! 8A king who sits on the throne of judgment winnows all evil with his eyes. 9Who can say, “I have made my heart pure; I am clean from my sin”? 10Unequal weights and unequal measures are both alike an abomination to the LORD. 11Even a child makes himself known by his acts, by whether his conduct is pure and upright. 12The hearing ear and the seeing eye, the LORD has made them both. 13Love not sleep, lest you come to poverty; open your eyes, and you will have plenty of bread. 14“Bad, bad,” says the buyer, but when he goes away, then he boasts. 15There is gold and abundance of costly stones, but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel. 16Take a man’s garment when he has put up security for a stranger, and hold it in pledge when he puts up security for foreigners. 17Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth will be full of gravel. 18Plans are established by counsel; by wise guidance wage war. 19Whoever goes about slandering reveals secrets; therefore do not associate with a simple babbler. 20If one curses his father or his mother, his lamp will be put out in utter darkness. 21An inheritance gained hastily in the beginning will not be blessed in the end. 22Do not say, “I will repay evil”; wait for the LORD, and he will deliver you. 23Unequal weights are an abomination to the LORD, and false scales are not good. 24A man’s steps are from the LORD; how then can man understand his way? 25It is a snare to say rashly, “It is holy,” and to reflect only after making vows. Additional Reading: Proverbs 21:1–31

## New Testament Reading: John 17:1–26

The High Priestly Prayer

1When Jesus had spoken these words, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, “Father, the hour has come; glorify your Son that the Son may glorify you, 2since you have given him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to all whom you have given him. 3And this is eternal life, that they know you the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent. 4I glorified you on earth, having accomplished the work that you gave me to do. 5And now, Father, glorify me in your own presence with the glory that I had with you before the world existed. 6“I have manifested your name to the people whom you gave me out of the world. Yours they were, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your word. 7Now they know that everything that you have given me is from you. 8For I have given them the words that you gave me, and they have received them and have come to know in truth that I came from you; and they have believed that you sent me. 9I am praying for them. I am not praying for the world but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours. 10All mine are yours, and yours are mine, and I am glorified in them. 11And I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name, which you have given me, that they may be one, even as we are one. 12While I was with them, I kept them in your name, which you have given me. I have guarded them, and not one of them has been lost except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. 13But now I am coming to you, and these things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves. 14I have given them your word, and the world has hated them because they are not of the world, just as I am not of the world. 15I do not ask that you take them out of the world, but that you keep them from the evil one. 16They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world. 17Sanctify them in the truth; your word is truth. 18As you sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the world. 19And for their sake I consecrate myself, that they also may be sanctified in truth. 20“I do not ask for these only, but also for those who will believe in me through their word, 21that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that you have sent me. 22The glory that you have given me I have given to them, that they may be one even as we are one, 23I in them and you in me, that they may become perfectly one, so that the world may know that you sent me and loved them even as you loved me. 24Father, I desire that they also, whom you have given me, may be with me where I am, to see my glory that you have given me because you loved me before the foundation of the world. 25O righteous Father, even though the world does not know you, I know you, and these know that you have sent me. 26I made known to them your name, and I will continue to make it known, that the love with which you have loved me may be in them, and I in them.”

## Writing

The Emperor Justinian himself declares, “Oportet maiestatem imperatoriam non solum armis decoratam, sed etiam legibus armatam esse.” “Imperial majesty,” he says, “must not only be adorned with arms, but also armed with laws.” See how marvelously this emperor turns his words about. He calls the laws his armor and weapons, and he calls arms his decoration and adornment; he would make his clerks his knights and fighting men. That is excellently put, for the laws are indeed the true armor and weapons which maintain and protect land and people, yes, the empire and worldly government itself, as has been sufficiently stated above. Wisdom is indeed better than might [Eccles. 9:16], and pious jurists are the true knights who defend the emperor and the princes. One could cite many passages to this effect from the poets and the histories, but it would take too long. Solomon himself declares in Ecclesiastes 9[:15] that a poor man by his wisdom delivered a city from a mighty king. By this I do not mean to say that we should despise, reject, or do away with soldiers, fighting men, and those whose business is war. They too, when they are obedient, help with their fist to maintain peace and protect things. Every occupation has its own honor before God, as well as its own requirements and duties.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

You are the great High Priest;
You have prepared the feast Of holy love;
And in our mortal pain
None calls on You in vain;
Our plea do not disdain; Help from above. (LSB 864:3)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, You make the minds of Your faithful to be of one will. Grant that we may love what You have commanded and desire what You promise, that among the many changes of this world our hearts may be fixed where true joys are found; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L45)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession III–IV

## ARTICLE III

## The Son of God

[1] Our churches teach that the Word, that is, the Son of God [John 1:14], assumed the human nature in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

[2] So there are two natures—the divine and the human—inseparably joined in one person. There is one Christ, true God and true man, who was born of the Virgin Mary, truly suffered, was crucified, died, and was buried.

[3] He did this to reconcile the Father to us and to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for all actual sins of mankind [John 1:29].

[4] He also descended into hell, and truly rose again on the third day. Afterward, He ascended into heaven to sit at the right hand of the Father. There He forever reigns and has dominion over all creatures.

[5] He sanctifies those who believe in Him, by sending the Holy Spirit into their hearts to rule, comfort, and make them alive. He defends them against the devil and the power of sin.

[6] The same Christ will openly come again to judge the living and the dead, and so forth, according to the Apostles’ Creed.

## ARTICLE IV

## Justification

[1] Our churches teach that people cannot be justified before God by their own strength, merits, or works.

[2] People are freely justified for Christ’s sake, through faith, when they believe that they are received into favor and that their sins are forgiven for Christ’s sake. By His death, Christ made satisfaction for our sins.

[3] God counts this faith for righteousness in His sight (Romans 3 and 4 [3:21–26; 4:5]).
