# June 16

## Psalmody

1Praise the LORD! For it is good to sing praises | to our God;* for it is pleasant, and a song of praise is | fitting. 2The LORD builds up Je- | rusalem;* he gathers the outcasts of | Israel. 3He heals the broken- | hearted* and binds | up their wounds. 4He determines the number | of the stars;* he gives to all of | them their names. 5Great is our Lord, and abun- | dant in power;* his understanding is beyond | measure. 6The LORD lifts up the | humble;* he casts the wicked | to the ground. 7Sing to the LORD with thanks- | giving;* make melody to our God | on the lyre! 8He covers the heavens with clouds; he prepares rain | for the earth;* he makes grass grow | on the hills. 9He gives to the | beasts their food,* and to the young ravens | that cry. 10His delight is not in the strength | of the horse,* nor his pleasure in the legs | of a man, 11but the LORD takes pleasure in those who | fear him,* in those who hope in his | steadfast love.—Psalm 147:1–11
Additional Psalm: Psalm 147

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 16:1–24

[The Proverbs of Solomon]

1The plans of the heart belong to man, but the answer of the tongue is from the LORD. 2All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes, but the LORD weighs the spirit. 3Commit your work to the LORD, and your plans will be established. 4The LORD has made everything for its purpose, even the wicked for the day of trouble. 5Everyone who is arrogant in heart is an abomination to the LORD; be assured, he will not go unpunished. 6By steadfast love and faithfulness iniquity is atoned for, and by the fear of the LORD one turns away from evil. 7When a man’s ways please the LORD, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. 8Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues with injustice. 9The heart of man plans his way, but the LORD establishes his steps. 10An oracle is on the lips of a king; his mouth does not sin in judgment. 11A just balance and scales are the LORD’s; all the weights in the bag are his work. 12It is an abomination to kings to do evil, for the throne is established by righteousness. 13Righteous lips are the delight of a king, and he loves him who speaks what is right. 14A king’s wrath is a messenger of death, and a wise man will appease it. 15In the light of a king’s face there is life, and his favor is like the clouds that bring the spring rain. 16How much better to get wisdom than gold! To get understanding is to be chosen rather than silver. 17The highway of the upright turns aside from evil; whoever guards his way preserves his life. 18Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. 19It is better to be of a lowly spirit with the poor than to divide the spoil with the proud. 20Whoever gives thought to the word will discover good, and blessed is he who trusts in the LORD. 21The wise of heart is called discerning, and sweetness of speech increases persuasiveness. 22Good sense is a fountain of life to him who has it, but the instruction of fools is folly. 23The heart of the wise makes his speech judicious and adds persuasiveness to his lips. 24Gracious words are like a honeycomb, sweetness to the soul and health to the body.

## New Testament Reading: John 16:1–16

[Jesus continued speaking to his disciples, saying:] 1“I have said all these things to you to keep you from falling away. 2They will put you out of the synagogues. Indeed, the hour is coming when whoever kills you will think he is offering service to God. 3And they will do these things because they have not known the Father, nor me. 4But I have said these things to you, that when their hour comes you may remember that I told them to you. The Work of the Holy Spirit “I did not say these things to you from the beginning, because I was with you. 5But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’ 6But because I have said these things to you, sorrow has filled your heart. 7Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you. 8And when he comes, he will convict the world concerning sin and righteousness and judgment: 9concerning sin, because they do not believe in me; 10concerning righteousness, because I go to the Father, and you will see me no longer; 11concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world is judged. 12“I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. 13When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. 14He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you. 15All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that he will take what is mine and declare it to you.

Your Sorrow Will Turn into Joy

16“A little while, and you will see me no longer; and again a little while, and you will see me.”

## Writing

Now Christ did not go to the Father for His own sake or for His own Person. For this would not have helped us and could not be called our righteousness. But just as He came down from heaven for our sakes and became our flesh and blood, so He also ascended into heaven for our sakes after conquering sin, death, and hell and entering into His dominion, by which He redeems us from all this and gives us forgiveness of sin, power, and victory over the devil and death…. Faith must lay hold of this, must be founded on it, and must take comfort from it in times of temptation, when the devil and man’s own conscience argue with him as follows: “Listen. What kind of Christian are you? Where is your righteousness? Do you not see and feel that you are a sinner? How, then will you pass muster before God?” Here again he must base his words on this verse and say: “I know very well, and I am sorry to say, that I am a sinner and that in me there is no righteousness that will be valid before God. And I must and will not look for or know of such righteousness in myself, for with it I could never come before God. But in this verse I hear Christ say that my righteousness consists in His going to the Father and in His ascension into heaven. There my righteousness has been deposited, and there the devil will surely have to let it remain; for he will not make Christ a sinner or reprove or find fault with His righteousness. If I am a sinner and my life does not pass muster before God, and if I find no righteousness in myself, I have another treasure, which is the righteousness of which I boast and on which I rely. This is Christ’s going to the Father, which He has presented to me as a gift.”—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

Come, holy Light, guide divine,
Now cause the Word of life to shine. Teach us to know our God aright And
call Him Father with delight.
From ev‘ry error keep us free;
Let none but Christ our master be That we in living faith abide, In Him, our
Lord, with all our might confide.
   Alleluia, alleluia!
—Come, Holy Ghost, God and Lord (LSB 497:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, You make the minds of Your faithful to be of one will. Grant that we may love what You have commanded and desire what You promise, that among the many changes of this world our hearts may be fixed where true joys are found; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L45)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession Preface 12–24
