# June 21

## Psalmody

22I will tell of your name to my | brothers;* in the midst of the congregation I will | praise you: 23You who fear the LORD, praise him! All you offspring of Jacob, glo- | rify him,* and stand in awe of him, all you offspring of | Israel! 24For he has not despised or abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, and he has not hidden his | face from him,* but has heard, when he | cried to him. 25From you comes my praise in the great congre- | gation;* my vows I will perform before those who | fear him. 26The afflicted shall eat and be satisfied; those who seek him shall | praise the LORD!* May your hearts live for- | ever! 27All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn | to the LORD,* and all the families of the nations shall worship be- | fore you.—Psalm 22:22–27
Additional Psalm: Psalm 21

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 24:1–22

[Words of the Wise]

1Be not envious of evil men, nor desire to be with them, 2for their hearts devise violence, and their lips talk of trouble. 3By wisdom a house is built, and by understanding it is established; 4by knowledge the rooms are filled with all precious and pleasant riches. 5A wise man is full of strength, and a man of knowledge enhances his might, 6for by wise guidance you can wage your war, and in abundance of counselors there is victory. 7Wisdom is too high for a fool; in the gate he does not open his mouth. 8Whoever plans to do evil will be called a schemer. 9The devising of folly is sin, and the scoffer is an abomination to mankind. 10If you faint in the day of adversity, your strength is small. 11Rescue those who are being taken away to death; hold back those who are stumbling to the slaughter. 12If you say, “Behold, we did not know this,” does not he who weighs the heart perceive it? Does not he who keeps watch over your soul know it, and will he not repay man according to his work? 13My son, eat honey, for it is good, and the drippings of the honeycomb are sweet to your taste. 14Know that wisdom is such to your soul; if you find it, there will be a future, and your hope will not be cut off. 15Lie not in wait as a wicked man against the dwelling of the righteous; do no violence to his home; 16for the righteous falls seven times and rises again, but the wicked stumble in times of calamity. 17Do not rejoice when your enemy falls, and let not your heart be glad when he stumbles, 18lest the LORD see it and be displeased, and turn away his anger from him. 19Fret not yourself because of evildoers, and be not envious of the wicked, 20for the evil man has no future; the lamp of the wicked will be put out. 21My son, fear the LORD and the king, and do not join with those who do otherwise, 22for disaster will arise suddenly from them, and who knows the ruin that will come from them both?

## New Testament Reading: John 19:1–22

Jesus Delivered to Be Crucified

1Then Pilate took Jesus and flogged him. 2And the soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on his head and arrayed him in a purple robe. 3They came up to him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” and struck him with their hands. 4Pilate went out again and said to them, “See, I am bringing him out to you that you may know that I find no guilt in him.” 5So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. Pilate said to them, “Behold the man!” 6When the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, “Crucify him, crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and crucify him, for I find no guilt in him.” 7The Jews answered him, “We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die because he has made himself the Son of God.” 8When Pilate heard this statement, he was even more afraid. 9He entered his headquarters again and said to Jesus, “Where are you from?” But Jesus gave him no answer. 10So Pilate said to him, “You will not speak to me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you and authority to crucify you?” 11Jesus answered him, “You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been given you from above. Therefore he who delivered me over to you has the greater sin.” 12From then on Pilate sought to release him, but the Jews cried out, “If you release this man, you are not Caesar’s friend. Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.” 13So when Pilate heard these words, he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called The Stone Pavement, and in Aramaic Gabbatha. 14Now it was the day of Preparation of the Passover. It was about the sixth hour. He said to the Jews, “Behold your King!” 15They cried out, “Away with him, away with him, crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your King?” The chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar.” 16So he delivered him over to them to be crucified. The Crucifixion So they took Jesus, 17and he went out, bearing his own cross, to the place called The Place of a Skull, which in Aramaic is called Golgotha. 18There they crucified him, and with him two others, one on either side, and Jesus between them. 19Pilate also wrote an inscription and put it on the cross. It read, “Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.” 20Many of the Jews read this inscription, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and it was written in Aramaic, in Latin, and in Greek. 21So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but rather, ‘This man said, I am King of the Jews.’” 22Pilate answered, “What I have written I have written.”

## Writing

For the coming of God’s kingdom to us happens in two ways: (a) here in time through the Word and faith [Matthew 13]; and (b) in eternity forever through revelation [Luke 19:11; 1 Peter 1:4–5]. Now we pray for both these things. We pray that the kingdom may come to those who are not yet in it, and, by daily growth that it may come to us who have received it, both now and hereafter in eternal life. All this is nothing other than saying, “Dear Father, we pray, give us first Your Word, so that the Gospel may be preached properly throughout the world. Second, may the Gospel be received in faith and work and live in us, so that through the Word and the Holy Spirit’s power [Romans 15:18–19], Your kingdom may triumph among us. And we pray that the devil’s kingdom be put down [Luke 11:17– 20], so that he may have no right or power over us [Luke 10:17–19; Colossians 1], until at last his power may be utterly destroyed. So sin, death, and hell shall be exterminated [Revelation 20:13–14]. Then we may live forever in perfect righteousness and blessedness” [Ephesians 4:12–13].
—Large Catechism III 53–54

## Hymnody

Inscribed upon the cross we see In shining letters, “God is love.”
He bears our sins upon the tree; He brings us mercy from above. (LSB
429:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus, though ruthless Pontius Pilate declared Your innocence before the crowds, You who knew no sin became sin for us. May the shame You bore for us on the cross give us the greatest honor so that we might always see that only in suffering can we see who You truly are, our glorious King and Savior; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1039)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession IX–XI

## ARTICLE IX

## Baptism

[1] Concerning Baptism, our churches teach that Baptism is necessary for salvation [Mark 16:16] and that God’s grace is offered through Baptism [Titus 3:4–7].

[2] They teach that children are to be baptized [Acts 2:38–39]. Being offered to God through Baptism, they are received into God’s grace.

[3] Our churches condemn the Anabaptists, who reject the Baptism of children, and say that children are saved without Baptism.

## ARTICLE X

## The Lord’s Supper

[1] Our churches teach that the body and blood of Christ are truly present and distributed to those who eat the Lord’s Supper [1 Corinthians 10:16].

[2] They reject those who teach otherwise.

## ARTICLE XI

## Confession

[1] Our churches teach that private Absolution should be retained in the churches, although listing all sins is not necessary for Confession.

[2] For, according to the Psalm, it is impossible. “Who can discern his errors?” (Psalm 19:12).
