# June 22

## Psalmody

12Many bulls en- | compass me;* strong bulls of Bashan sur- | round me; 13they open wide their | mouths at me,* like a ravening and roaring | lion. 14I am poured out like water, and all my bones are | out of joint;* my heart is like wax; it is melted with- | in my breast; 15my strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue sticks | to my jaws;* you lay me in the | dust of death. 16For dogs en- | compass me;* a company of evildoers encircles me; they have pierced my | hands and feet—17I can count | all my bones—* they stare and gloat | over me; 18they divide my garments a- | mong them,* and for my clothing they | cast lots. 19But you, O LORD, do not be | far off!* O you my help, come quickly | to my aid! 20Deliver my soul | from the sword,* my precious life from the power | of the dog! 21Save me from the mouth of the | lion!* You have rescued me from the horns of the wild | oxen!—Psalm 22:12–21
Additional Psalm: Psalm 22

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 25:1–22

More Proverbs of Solomon

1These also are proverbs of Solomon which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied. 2It is the glory of God to conceal things, but the glory of kings is to search things out. 3As the heavens for height, and the earth for depth, so the heart of kings is unsearchable. 4Take away the dross from the silver, and the smith has material for a vessel; 5take away the wicked from the presence of the king, and his throne will be established in righteousness. 6Do not put yourself forward in the king’s presence or stand in the place of the great, 7for it is better to be told, “Come up here,” than to be put lower in the presence of a noble. What your eyes have seen 8do not hastily bring into court, for what will you do in the end, when your neighbor puts you to shame? 9Argue your case with your neighbor himself, and do not reveal another’s secret, 10lest he who hears you bring shame upon you, and your ill repute have no end. 11A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in a setting of silver. 12Like a gold ring or an ornament of gold is a wise reprover to a listening ear. 13Like the cold of snow in the time of harvest is a faithful messenger to those who send him; he refreshes the soul of his masters. 14Like clouds and wind without rain is a man who boasts of a gift he does not give. 15With patience a ruler may be persuaded, and a soft tongue will break a bone. 16If you have found honey, eat only enough for you, lest you have your fill of it and vomit it. 17Let your foot be seldom in your neighbor’s house, lest he have his fill of you and hate you. 18A man who bears false witness against his neighbor is like a war club, or a sword, or a sharp arrow. 19Trusting in a treacherous man in time of trouble is like a bad tooth or a foot that slips. 20Whoever sings songs to a heavy heart is like one who takes off a garment on a cold day, and like vinegar on soda. 21If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink, 22for you will heap burning coals on his head, and the LORD will reward you. Additional Reading: Proverbs 26:1–28

## New Testament Reading: John 19:23–42

[The Crucifixion]

23When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his garments and divided them into four parts, one part for each soldier; also his tunic. But the tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom, 24so they said to one another, “Let us not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it shall be.” This was to fulfill the Scripture which says, “They divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast lots.” So the soldiers did these things, 25but standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. 26When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, “Woman, behold, your son!” 27Then he said to the disciple, “Behold, your mother!” And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home.

The Death of Jesus

28After this, Jesus, knowing that all was now finished, said (to fulfill the Scripture), “I thirst.” 29A jar full of sour wine stood there, so they put a sponge full of the sour wine on a hyssop branch and held it to his mouth. 30When Jesus had received the sour wine, he said, “It is finished,” and he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.

Jesus—Side Is Pierced

31Since it was the day of Preparation, and so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a high day), the Jews asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away. 32So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who had been crucified with him. 33But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs. 34But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and at once there came out blood and water. 35He who saw it has borne witness—his testimony is true, and he knows that he is telling the truth—that you also may believe. 36For these things took place that the Scripture might be fulfilled: “Not one of his bones will be broken.” 37And again another Scripture says, “They will look on him whom they have pierced.”

Jesus Is Buried

38After these things Joseph of Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave him permission. So he came and took away his body. 39Nicodemus also, who earlier had come to Jesus by night, came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds in weight. 40So they took the body of Jesus and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as is the burial custom of the Jews. 41Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb in which no one had yet been laid. 42So because of the Jewish day of Preparation, since the tomb was close at hand, they laid Jesus there.

## Writing

“I just want you to know from the beginning, sir, that I am a believer,” [the young Pastor Fridfeldt] said [to the older pastor].… “So you are a believer, I—m glad to hear that. What do you believe in?” Fridfeldt stared dumbfounded at his superior.… “But, sir, I am simply saying that I am a believer.” “Yes, I hear that, my boy. But what is it that you believe in?” Fridfeldt was almost speechless. “But don—t you know, sir, what it means to be a believer?” “That is a word which can stand for things that differ greatly, my boy. I ask only what it is that you believe in.” “In Jesus, of course,” answered Fridfeldt, raising his voice. “I mean—I mean that I have given him my heart.”… “Do you consider that something to give him?” By this time, Fridfeldt was almost in tears. “But sir, if you do not give your heart to Jesus, you cannot be saved.” “You are right, my boy. And it is just as true that, if you think you are saved because you give Jesus your heart, you will not be saved. You see, my boy,” he continued reassuringly, as he continued to look at the young pastor’s face, in which uncertainty and resentment were shown in a struggle for the upper hand, “it is one thing to choose Jesus as one’s Lord and Savior, to give him one’s heart and commit oneself to him, and that he now accepts one into his little flock; it is a very different thing to believe on him as a Redeemer of sinners, of whom one is chief. One does not choose a Redeemer for oneself, you understand, nor give one’s heart to him. The heart is a rusty old can on a junk heap. A fine birthday gift, indeed! But a wonderful Lord passes by, and has mercy on the wretched tin can, sticks his walking cane through it, and rescues it from the junk pile and takes it home with him. That is how it is.”—Bo Giertz

## Hymnody

No work is left undone Of all the Father willed;
His toil, His sorrows, one by one, The Scriptures have fulfilled. (LSB 452:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus, our Savior and Lord, You declared that the work of bringing in a new creation was accomplished by Your declaration from the cross that “It is finished.” Give us eyes to see the signs of the new creation in Your ongoing healing of our bodies and souls through Your Holy Sacraments, where You continue to come to us as our Creator who is bringing in the new creation; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1040)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession XII–XIII
