# June 23

## Psalmody

14I praise you, for I am fearfully and wonder- | fully made.* Wonderful are your works; my soul knows it | very well. 15My frame was not hid- | den from you,* when I was being made in secret, intricately woven in the depths | of the earth. 16Your eyes saw my unformed substance; in your book were written, every | one of them,* the days that were formed for me, when as yet there were | none of them. 17How precious to me are your thoughts, | O God!* How vast is the | sum of them! 18If I would count them, they are more | than the sand.* I awake, and I am still | with you. 23Search me, O God, and | know my heart!* Try me and | know my thoughts! 24And see if there be any grievous | way in me,* and lead me in the way ever- | lasting!—Psalm 139:14–18, 23–24
Additional Psalm: Psalm 16

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 27:1–24

[More Proverbs of Solomon]

1Do not boast about tomorrow, for you do not know what a day may bring. 2Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips. 3A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty, but a fool’s provocation is heavier than both. 4Wrath is cruel, anger is overwhelming, but who can stand before jealousy? 5Better is open rebuke than hidden love. 6Faithful are the wounds of a friend; profuse are the kisses of an enemy. 7One who is full loathes honey, but to one who is hungry everything bitter is sweet. 8Like a bird that strays from its nest is a man who strays from his home. 9Oil and perfume make the heart glad, and the sweetness of a friend comes from his earnest counsel. 10Do not forsake your friend and your father’s friend, and do not go to your brother’s house in the day of your calamity. Better is a neighbor who is near than a brother who is far away. 11Be wise, my son, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him who reproaches me. 12The prudent sees danger and hides himself, but the simple go on and suffer for it. 13Take a man’s garment when he has put up security for a stranger, and hold it in pledge when he puts up security for an adulteress. 14Whoever blesses his neighbor with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, will be counted as cursing. 15A continual dripping on a rainy day and a quarrelsome wife are alike; 16to restrain her is to restrain the wind or to grasp oil in one’s right hand. 17Iron sharpens iron, and one man sharpens another. 18Whoever tends a fig tree will eat its fruit, and he who guards his master will be honored. 19As in water face reflects face, so the heart of man reflects the man. 20Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied, and never satisfied are the eyes of man. 21The crucible is for silver, and the furnace is for gold, and a man is tested by his praise. 22Crush a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with crushed grain, yet his folly will not depart from him. 23Know well the condition of your flocks, and give attention to your herds, 24for riches do not last forever; and does a crown endure to all generations? Additional Reading: Proverbs 28:1–29:27

## New Testament Reading: John 20:1–18

The Resurrection

1Now on the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and saw that the stone had been taken away from the tomb. 2So she ran and went to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one whom Jesus loved, and said to them, “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.” 3So Peter went out with the other disciple, and they were going toward the tomb. 4Both of them were running together, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first. 5And stooping to look in, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in. 6Then Simon Peter came, following him, and went into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying there, 7and the face cloth, which had been on Jesus—head, not lying with the linen cloths but folded up in a place by itself. 8Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went in, and he saw and believed; 9for as yet they did not understand the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead. 10Then the disciples went back to their homes.

Jesus Appears to Mary Magdalene

11But Mary stood weeping outside the tomb, and as she wept she stooped to look into the tomb. 12And she saw two angels in white, sitting where the body of Jesus had lain, one at the head and one at the feet. 13They said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them, “They have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have laid him.” 14Having said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing, but she did not know that it was Jesus. 15Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you seeking?” Supposing him to be the gardener, she said to him, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.” 16Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She turned and said to him in Aramaic, “Rabboni!” (which means Teacher). 17Jesus said to her, “Do not cling to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father; but go to my brothers and say to them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’” 18Mary Magdalene went and announced to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord”—and that he had said these things to her.

## Writing

The Chief Article The first and chief article is this: Jesus Christ, our God and Lord, died for our sins and was raised again for our justification (Romans 4:24–25). He alone is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world (John 1:29), and God has laid upon Him the iniquities of us all (Isaiah 53:6). All have sinned and are justified freely, without their own works or merits, by His grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, in His blood (Romans 3:23–25). This is necessary to believe. This cannot be otherwise acquired or grasped by any work, law, or merit. Therefore, it is clear and certain that this faith alone justifies us. As St. Paul says: For we hold that one is justified by faith apart from works of the law. (Romans 3:28) That He might be just and the justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus. [Romans 3:26] Nothing of this article can be yielded or surrendered, even though heaven and earth and everything else falls [Mark 13:31]. For there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved. (Acts 4:12) And with His stripes we are healed. (Isaiah 53:5) Upon this article everything that we teach and practice depends, in opposition to the pope, the devil, and the whole world. Therefore, we must be certain and not doubt this doctrine. Otherwise, all is lost, and the pope, the devil, and all adversaries win the victory and the right over us. ’s malcald Articles II I 1–5

## Hymnody

Early hasten to the tomb Where they laid His breathless clay;
All is solitude and gloom. Who has taken Him away?
Christ is ris—n! He meets our eyes.
Savior, teach us so to rise. (LSB 436:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, through Your only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, You overcame death and opened to us the gate of everlasting life. We humbly pray that we may live before You in righteousness and purity forever; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L35)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession XIV–XVI

## ARTICLE XIV

## Order in the Church

Our churches teach that no one should publicly teach in the Church, or administer the Sacraments, without a rightly ordered call.

## ARTICLE XV

## Church Ceremonies

[1] Our churches teach that ceremonies ought to be observed that may be observed without sin. Also, ceremonies and other practices that are profitable for tranquility and good order in the Church (in particular, holy days, festivals, and the like) ought to be observed.

[2] Yet, the people are taught that consciences are not to be burdened as though observing such things was necessary for salvation [Colossians 2:16–17].

[3] They are also taught that human traditions instituted to make atonement with God, to merit grace, and to make satisfaction for sins are opposed to the Gospel and the doctrine of faith.

[4] So vows and traditions concerning meats and days, and so forth, instituted to merit grace and to make satisfaction for sins, are useless and contrary to the Gospel.

## ARTICLE XVI

## Civil Government

[1] Our churches teach that lawful civil regulations are good works of God.

[2] They teach that it is right for Christians to hold political office, to serve as judges, to judge matters by imperial laws and other existing laws, to impose just punishments, to engage in just wars, to serve as soldiers, to make legal contracts, to hold property, to take oaths when required by the magistrates, for a man to marry a wife, or a woman to be given in marriage [Romans 13; 1 Corinthians 7:2].

[3] Our churches condemn the Anabaptists who forbid these political offices to Christians.

[4] They also condemn those who do not locate evangelical perfection in the fear of God and in faith, but place it in forsaking political offices.

[5] For the Gospel teaches an eternal righteousness of the heart (Romans 10:10). At the same time, it does not require the destruction of the civil state or the family. The Gospel very much requires that they be preserved as God’s ordinances and that love be practiced in such ordinances.

[6] Therefore, it is necessary for Christians to be obedient to their rulers and laws.

[7] The only exception is when they are commanded to sin. Then they ought to obey God rather than men (Acts 5:29).
