# June 20

## Psalmody

6Your throne, O God, is forever and ever. The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of up- | rightness;* 7you have loved righteousness and hated | wickedness. Therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness beyond your com- | panions;* 8your robes are all fragrant with myrrh and aloes and | cassia. From ivory palaces stringed instruments | make you glad;* 9daughters of kings are among your ladies of honor; at your right hand stands the queen in gold of | Ophir. 10Hear, O daughter, and consider, and in- | cline your ear:* forget your people and your | father’s house, 11and the king will desire your | beauty.* Since he is your lord, | bow to him. 12The people of Tyre will seek your fa- | vor with gifts,* the richest of the | people.—Psalm 45:6–12
Additional Psalm: Psalm 45

## Old Testament Reading: Proverbs 22:22–23:12

[Words of the Wise]

22Do not rob the poor, because he is poor, or crush the afflicted at the gate, 23for the LORD will plead their cause and rob of life those who rob them. 24Make no friendship with a man given to anger, nor go with a wrathful man, 25lest you learn his ways and entangle yourself in a snare. 26Be not one of those who give pledges, who put up security for debts. 27If you have nothing with which to pay, why should your bed be taken from under you? 28Do not move the ancient landmark that your fathers have set. 29Do you see a man skillful in his work? He will stand before kings; he will not stand before obscure men. 23:1When you sit down to eat with a ruler, observe carefully what is before you, 2and put a knife to your throat if you are given to appetite. 3Do not desire his delicacies, for they are deceptive food. 4Do not toil to acquire wealth; be discerning enough to desist. 5When your eyes light on it, it is gone, for suddenly it sprouts wings, flying like an eagle toward heaven. 6Do not eat the bread of a man who is stingy; do not desire his delicacies, 7for he is like one who is inwardly calculating. “Eat and drink!” he says to you, but his heart is not with you. 8You will vomit up the morsels that you have eaten, and waste your pleasant words. 9Do not speak in the hearing of a fool, for he will despise the good sense of your words. 10Do not move an ancient landmark or enter the fields of the fatherless, 11for their Redeemer is strong; he will plead their cause against you. 12Apply your heart to instruction and your ear to words of knowledge.

## New Testament Reading: John 18:15–40

Peter Denies Jesus

15Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. Since that disciple was known to the high priest, he entered with Jesus into the court of the high priest, 16but Peter stood outside at the door. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the servant girl who kept watch at the door, and brought Peter in. 17The servant girl at the door said to Peter, “You also are not one of this man’s disciples, are you?” He said, “I am not.” 18Now the servants and officers had made a charcoal fire, because it was cold, and they were standing and warming themselves. Peter also was with them, standing and warming himself.

The High Priest Questions Jesus

19The high priest then questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching. 20Jesus answered him, “I have spoken openly to the world. I have always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where all Jews come together. I have said nothing in secret. 21Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them; they know what I said.” 22When he had said these things, one of the officers standing by struck Jesus with his hand, saying, “Is that how you answer the high priest?” 23Jesus answered him, “If what I said is wrong, bear witness about the wrong; but if what I said is right, why do you strike me?” 24Annas then sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.

Peter Denies Jesus Again

25Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. So they said to him, “You also are not one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it and said, “I am not.” 26One of the servants of the high priest, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, asked, “Did I not see you in the garden with him?” 27Peter again denied it, and at once a rooster crowed.

Jesus Before Pilate

28Then they led Jesus from the house of Caiaphas to the governor’s headquarters. It was early morning. They themselves did not enter the governor’s headquarters, so that they would not be defiled, but could eat the Passover. 29So Pilate went outside to them and said, “What accusation do you bring against this man?” 30They answered him, “If this man were not doing evil, we would not have delivered him over to you.” 31Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law.” The Jews said to him, “It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death.” 32This was to fulfill the word that Jesus had spoken to show by what kind of death he was going to die.

My Kingdom Is Not of This World

33So Pilate entered his headquarters again and called Jesus and said to him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” 34Jesus answered, “Do you say this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me?” 35Pilate answered, “Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests have delivered you over to me. What have you done?” 36Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews. But my kingdom is not from the world.” 37Then Pilate said to him, “So you are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say that I am a king. For this purpose I was born and for this purpose I have come into the world—to bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.” 38Pilate said to him, “What is truth?” After he had said this, he went back outside to the Jews and told them, “I find no guilt in him. 39But you have a custom that I should release one man for you at the Passover. So do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?” 40They cried out again, “Not this man, but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a robber.

## Writing

The ministry of the New Testament is not bound to places and persons like the Levitical [Old Testament] ministry was. Rather, it is spread throughout the whole world. That is where God gives His gifts, apostles, prophets, pastors, and teachers [Ephesians 4:11]. Nor does this ministry work because of the authority of any person, but because of the Word given by Christ [Romans 10:17].… Christ gave the apostles only spiritual power (i.e., the command to teach the Gospel, to announce the forgiveness of sins, to administer the Sacraments, to excommunicate the godless without bodily force ‹by the Word›). He did not give them the power of the sword (the right to establish, occupy, or bestow kingdoms of the world [Romans 13:4]). For Christ says, “Go … teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you” (Matthew 28:19–20). Also, “As the Father has sent Me, even so I am sending you” (John 20:21). It is clear that Christ was not sent to bear the sword or possess a worldly kingdom, as He Himself says, “My kingdom is not of this world” (John 18:36). And Paul says, “Not that we lord it over your faith” (2 Corinthians 1:24); and “The weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh” (2 Corinthians 10:4), and so forth.—Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope 26, 31

## Hymnody

The star proclaims the King is here; But, Herod, why this senseless fear?
For He who offers heav—nly birth Seeks not the kingdoms of this earth.
(LSB 399:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus Christ, so govern our hearts and minds by Your Holy Spirit that, ever mindful of Your glorious return, we may persevere in both faith and holiness of living; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (B87)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession VII–VIII

## ARTICLE VII

## The Church

[1] Our churches teach that one holy Church is to remain forever. The Church is the congregation of saints [Psalm 149:1] in which the Gospel is purely taught and the Sacraments are correctly administered.

[2] For the true unity of the Church it is enough to agree about the doctrine of the Gospel and the administration of the Sacraments.

[3] It is not necessary that human traditions, that is, rites or ceremonies instituted by men, should be the same everywhere.

[4] As Paul says, “One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all” (Ephesians 4:5–6).

## ARTICLE VIII

## What the Church Is

[1] Strictly speaking, the Church is the congregation of saints and true believers. However, because many hypocrites and evil persons are mingled within them in this life [Matthew 13:24–30], it is lawful to use Sacraments administered by evil men, according to the saying of Christ, “The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses’ seat” (Matthew 23:2). Both the Sacraments and Word are effective

[2] because of Christ’s institution and command, even if they are administered by evil men.

[3] Our churches condemn the Donatists, and others like them, who deny that it is lawful to use the ministry of evil men in the Church, and who think that the ministry of evil men is not useful and is ineffective.
