# July 1

## Psalmody

1Clap your hands, all | peoples!* Shout to God with loud | songs of joy! 2For the LORD, the Most High, is | to be feared,* a great king over | all the earth. 3He subdued peoples | under us,* and nations un- | der our feet. 4He chose our heritage | for us,* the pride of Jacob | whom he loves. 5God has gone up | with a shout,* the LORD with the sound of a | trumpet. 6Sing praises to God, sing | praises!* Sing praises to our King, sing | praises! 7For God is the King of | all the earth;* sing praises | with a psalm!—Psalm 47:1–7
Additional Psalm: Psalm 75

## Old Testament Reading: Joshua 6:6–27

[The Fall of Jericho]

6So Joshua the son of Nun called the priests and said to them, “Take up the ark of the covenant and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the LORD.” 7And he said to the people, “Go forward. March around the city and let the armed men pass on before the ark of the LORD.” 8And just as Joshua had commanded the people, the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the LORD went forward, blowing the trumpets, with the ark of the covenant of the LORD following them. 9The armed men were walking before the priests who were blowing the trumpets, and the rear guard was walking after the ark, while the trumpets blew continually. 10But Joshua commanded the people, “You shall not shout or make your voice heard, neither shall any word go out of your mouth, until the day I tell you to shout. Then you shall shout.” 11So he caused the ark of the LORD to circle the city, going about it once. And they came into the camp and spent the night in the camp. 12Then Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the LORD. 13And the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the LORD walked on, and they blew the trumpets continually. And the armed men were walking before them, and the rear guard was walking after the ark of the LORD, while the trumpets blew continually. 14And the second day they marched around the city once, and returned into the camp. So they did for six days. 15On the seventh day they rose early, at the dawn of day, and marched around the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that they marched around the city seven times. 16And at the seventh time, when the priests had blown the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, “Shout, for the LORD has given you the city. 17And the city and all that is within it shall be devoted to the LORD for destruction. Only Rahab the prostitute and all who are with her in her house shall live, because she hid the messengers whom we sent. 18But you, keep yourselves from the things devoted to destruction, lest when you have devoted them you take any of the devoted things and make the camp of Israel a thing for destruction and bring trouble upon it. 19But all silver and gold, and every vessel of bronze and iron, are holy to the LORD; they shall go into the treasury of the LORD.” 20So the people shouted, and the trumpets were blown. As soon as the people heard the sound of the trumpet, the people shouted a great shout, and the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they captured the city. 21Then they devoted all in the city to destruction, both men and women, young and old, oxen, sheep, and donkeys, with the edge of the sword. 22But to the two men who had spied out the land, Joshua said, “Go into the prostitute’s house and bring out from there the woman and all who belong to her, as you swore to her.” 23So the young men who had been spies went in and brought out Rahab and her father and mother and brothers and all who belonged to her. And they brought all her relatives and put them outside the camp of Israel. 24And they burned the city with fire, and everything in it. Only the silver and gold, and the vessels of bronze and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the LORD. 25But Rahab the prostitute and her father’s household and all who belonged to her, Joshua saved alive. And she has lived in Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho. 26Joshua laid an oath on them at that time, saying, “Cursed before the LORD be the man who rises up and rebuilds this city, Jericho. “At the cost of his firstborn shall he lay its foundation, and at the cost of his youngest son shall he set up its gates.” 27So the LORD was with Joshua, and his fame was in all the land.

## New Testament Reading: Acts 10:18–33

[Peter’s Vision]

18[Cornelius’s servants] called out to ask whether Simon who was called Peter was lodging there. 19And while Peter was pondering the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, three men are looking for you. 20Rise and go down and accompany them without hesitation, for I have sent them.” 21And Peter went down to the men and said, “I am the one you are looking for. What is the reason for your coming?” 22And they said, “Cornelius, a centurion, an upright and God-fearing man, who is well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, was directed by a holy angel to send for you to come to his house and to hear what you have to say.” 23So he invited them in to be his guests. The next day he rose and went away with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him. 24And on the following day they entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends. 25When Peter entered, Cornelius met him and fell down at his feet and worshiped him. 26But Peter lifted him up, saying, “Stand up; I too am a man.” 27And as he talked with him, he went in and found many persons gathered. 28And he said to them, “You yourselves know how unlawful it is for a Jew to associate with or to visit anyone of another nation, but God has shown me that I should not call any person common or unclean. 29So when I was sent for, I came without objection. I ask then why you sent for me.” 30And Cornelius said, “Four days ago, about this hour, I was praying in my house at the ninth hour, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing 31and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard and your alms have been remembered before God. 32Send therefore to Joppa and ask for Simon who is called Peter. He is lodging in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea.’ 33So I sent for you at once, and you have been kind enough to come. Now therefore we are all here in the presence of God to hear all that you have been commanded by the Lord.”

## Writing

The Manichaeans said that the Son of God took not a real but an apparent body and that the things which He did as man—being born, eating, drinking, walking, suffering, and being buried—were not done in reality, but in show. To begin with, this theory robs Scripture of all authority. For since a show of flesh is not flesh, nor a show of walking walking, the Scripture lies when it says, “The Word was made flesh,” if the flesh was only apparent. It lies when it says that Jesus Christ walked, ate, was dead and buried, if these things happened only in fantastic appearance. … There is no Scripture authority to derogate from the literal truth of all that we read about the humanity of Christ. When the apostle says, God sent “His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh” (Romans 8:3), he does not say “in the likeness of flesh” but adds “sinful,” because Christ had true flesh but not sinful flesh (there being no sin in Him). But His flesh was like sinful flesh, inasmuch as He had flesh liable to suffering, as man’s flesh was rendered liable by sin. So the expression “born in the likeness of men (Philippians 2:7) conveys no idea of illusion…. Moreover there are passages in which Holy Scripture expressly bars the suspicion of Christ being a mere appearance: Matthew 14:26–27; Luke 24:37–39; Acts 10:40–41; and St. John’s words, “That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and have touched with our hands, concerning the word of life” (1 John 1:1). In fact, if Christ had not a real body, He did not really die; neither therefore did He really rise again. “And if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in vain. We are even found to be misrepresenting God, because we have testified about God that He raised Christ, whom He did not raise [if Christ never really died]” (1 Corinthians 15:14–15).—Thomas Aquinas

## Hymnody

While I am a pilgrim here, Let Thy love my spirit cheer; As my guide, my
guard, my friend, Lead me to my journey’s end.—Come My Soul, with
Every Care (LSB 779:5)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, You called Cornelius the Gentile soldier to hear the Word proclaimed for his salvation and that of his household. As he responded to the hearing of Your Word with the giving of alms, so also may we be led to acts of mercy and charity as we embody Christ in our daily lives; through Your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1046)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession XXIV 21–41

[21] An opinion was added that infinitely increased private Masses. It states that Christ, by His passion, made satisfaction for original sin and instituted the Mass as an offering for daily sins, both venial and mortal.

[22] From this opinion has arisen the common belief that the Mass takes away the sins of the living and the dead simply by performing the outward act.

[23] Then they began to argue about whether one Mass said for many is worth as much as special Masses for individuals. This resulted in an infinite number of Masses. ‹With this work, people wanted to obtain from God all that they needed, and in the meantime, trust in Christ and true worship were forgotten›.

[24] Our teachers have warned that these opinions depart from the Holy Scripture and diminish the glory of the passion of Christ.

[25] For Christ’s passion was an offering and satisfaction, not only for original guilt, but also for all other sins, as it is written,

[26] “We have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all” (Hebrews 10:10).

[27] Also, “By a single offering He has perfected for all time those who are being sanctified” (Hebrews 10:14). ‹It is an unheard-of innovation in the Church to teach that by His death Christ has made satisfaction only for original sin and not for all other sin. So it is hoped that everybody will understand that this error has been rebuked for good reason.›

[28] Scripture teaches that we are justified before God, through faith in Christ, when we believe that our sins are forgiven for Christ’s sake.

[29] Now if the Mass takes away the sins of the living and the dead simply by performing it, justification comes by doing Masses, and not of faith. Scripture does not allow this.

[30] But Christ commands us, “Do this in remembrance of Me” (Luke 22:19). Therefore, the Mass was instituted so that those who use the Sacrament should remember, in faith, the benefits they receive through Christ and how their anxious consciences are cheered and comforted.

[31] To remember Christ is to remember His benefits. It means to realize that they are truly offered to us. It is not enough only to remember history.

[32] (The Jewish people and the ungodly also remember this.)

[33] Therefore, the Mass is to be used for administering the Sacrament to those who need consolation. Ambrose says, “Because I always sin, I always need to take the medicine.”

[34] Because the Mass is for the purpose of giving the Sacrament, we have Communion every holy day, and if anyone desires the Sacrament, we also offer it on other days, when it is given to all who ask for it. This custom is not new in the Church.

[35] The Fathers before Gregory make no mention of any private Mass, but they speak a lot about the common Mass, ‹Communion›.

[36] Chrysostom says “that the priest stands daily at the altar, inviting some to the Communion and keeping back others.”

[37] It appears from the ancient council decisions that one person celebrated the Mass from whom all the other presbyters and deacons received the body of the Lord.

[38] The records of the decisions of the Council of Nicaea state, “Let the deacons, according to their order, receive the Holy Communion after the presbyters, from the bishop or from a presbyter.”

[39] Paul, in 1 Corinthians 11:33, has this command in regard to Communion: “wait for one another” so that there may be a common participation.

[40] Therefore, since the Mass among us follows the example of the Church, taken from the Scripture and the Fathers, we are confident that it cannot be disapproved. This is especially so because we keep the public ceremonies, which are for the most part similar to those previously in use. Only the number of Masses differs. Without a doubt, these might be reduced in a helpful way, because of very great and clear abuses.

[41] For in older times, even in churches attended the most often, the Mass was not celebrated every day, as the Tripartite History (Book 9, chap. 33) testifies, “In Alexandria, every Wednesday and Friday the Scriptures are read, and the doctors expound them, and all things are done, except the solemn rite of Communion.”
