# July 12

## Psalmody

10All nations sur- | rounded me;* in the name of the LORD I | cut them off! 11They surrounded me, surrounded me on | every side;* in the name of the LORD I | cut them off! 12They surrounded me like bees; they went out like a fire a- | mong thorns;* in the name of the LORD I | cut them off! 13I was pushed hard, so that I was | falling,* but the LORD | helped me. 14The LORD is my strength | and my song;* he has become my sal- | vation. 15Glad songs of salvation are in the tents of the | righteous:* “The right hand of the LORD does | valiantly, 16the right hand of the | LORD exalts,* the right hand of the LORD does | valiantly!” 17I shall not die, but | I shall live,* and recount the deeds | of the LORD. 18The LORD has disciplined me se- | verely,* but he has not given me o- | ver to death.—Psalm 118:10–18
Additional Psalm: Psalm 108

## Old Testament Reading: Judges 7:1–23

Gideon’s Three Hundred Men

1Then Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) and all the people who were with him rose early and encamped beside the spring of Harod. And the camp of Midian was north of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley. 2The LORD said to Gideon, “The people with you are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hand, lest Israel boast over me, saying, ‘My own hand has saved me.’ 3Now therefore proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, ‘Whoever is fearful and trembling, let him return home and hurry away from Mount Gilead.’” Then 22,000 of the people returned, and 10,000 remained. 4And the LORD said to Gideon, “The people are still too many. Take them down to the water, and I will test them for you there, and anyone of whom I say to you, ‘This one shall go with you,’ shall go with you, and anyone of whom I say to you, ‘This one shall not go with you,’ shall not go.” 5So he brought the people down to the water. And the LORD said to Gideon, “Every one who laps the water with his tongue, as a dog laps, you shall set by himself. Likewise, every one who kneels down to drink.” 6And the number of those who lapped, putting their hands to their mouths, was 300 men, but all the rest of the people knelt down to drink water. 7And the LORD said to Gideon, “With the 300 men who lapped I will save you and give the Midianites into your hand, and let all the others go every man to his home.” 8So the people took provisions in their hands, and their trumpets. And he sent all the rest of Israel every man to his tent, but retained the 300 men. And the camp of Midian was below him in the valley. 9That same night the LORD said to him, “Arise, go down against the camp, for I have given it into your hand. 10But if you are afraid to go down, go down to the camp with Purah your servant. 11And you shall hear what they say, and afterward your hands shall be strengthened to go down against the camp.” Then he went down with Purah his servant to the outposts of the armed men who were in the camp. 12And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the people of the East lay along the valley like locusts in abundance, and their camels were without number, as the sand that is on the seashore in abundance. 13When Gideon came, behold, a man was telling a dream to his comrade. And he said, “Behold, I dreamed a dream, and behold, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian and came to the tent and struck it so that it fell and turned it upside down, so that the tent lay flat.” 14And his comrade answered, “This is no other than the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel; God has given into his hand Midian and all the camp.” 15As soon as Gideon heard the telling of the dream and its interpretation, he worshiped. And he returned to the camp of Israel and said, “Arise, for the LORD has given the host of Midian into your hand.” 16And he divided the 300 men into three companies and put trumpets into the hands of all of them and empty jars, with torches inside the jars. 17And he said to them, “Look at me, and do likewise. When I come to the outskirts of the camp, do as I do. 18When I blow the trumpet, I and all who are with me, then blow the trumpets also on every side of all the camp and shout, ‘For the LORD and for Gideon.’”

Gideon Defeats Midian

19So Gideon and the hundred men who were with him came to the outskirts of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch, when they had just set the watch. And they blew the trumpets and smashed the jars that were in their hands. 20Then the three companies blew the trumpets and broke the jars. They held in their left hands the torches, and in their right hands the trumpets to blow. And they cried out, “A sword for the LORD and for Gideon!” 21Every man stood in his place around the camp, and all the army ran. They cried out and fled. 22When they blew the 300 trumpets, the LORD set every man’s sword against his comrade and against all the army. And the army fled as far as Beth-shittah toward Zererah, as far as the border of Abel-meholah, by Tabbath. 23And the men of Israel were called out from Naphtali and from Asher and from all Manasseh, and they pursued after Midian. Additional Reading: Judges 7:24–12:15

## New Testament Reading: Galatians 1:1–24

Greeting

1Paul, an apostle—not from men nor through man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead—2and all the brothers who are with me, To the churches of Galatia: 3Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, 4who gave himself for our sins to deliver us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father, 5to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.

No Other Gospel

6I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting him who called you in the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel—7not that there is another one, but there are some who trouble you and want to distort the gospel of Christ. 8But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be accursed. 9As we have said before, so now I say again: If anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, let him be accursed. 10For am I now seeking the approval of man, or of God? Or am I trying to please man? If I were still trying to please man, I would not be a servant of Christ.

Paul Called by God

11For I would have you know, brothers, that the gospel that was preached by me is not man’s gospel. 12For I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it, but I received it through a revelation of Jesus Christ. 13For you have heard of my former life in Judaism, how I persecuted the church of God violently and tried to destroy it. 14And I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people, so extremely zealous was I for the traditions of my fathers. 15But when he who had set me apart before I was born, and who called me by his grace, 16was pleased to reveal his Son to me, in order that I might preach him among the Gentiles, I did not immediately consult with anyone; 17nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia, and returned again to Damascus. 18Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas and remained with him fifteen days. 19But I saw none of the other apostles except James the Lord’s brother. 20(In what I am writing to you, before God, I do not lie!) 21Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia. 22And I was still unknown in person to the churches of Judea that are in Christ. 23They only were hearing it said, “He who used to persecute us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy.” 24And they glorified God because of me.

## Writing

Grace and peace—these two words embrace the whole of Christianity. Grace forgives sin, and peace stills the conscience. The two devils who plague us are sin and conscience, the power of the Law and the sting of sin (1 Cor. 15:56). But Christ has conquered these two monsters and trodden them underfoot, both in this age and in the age to come. The world does not know this; therefore it cannot teach anything sure about how to overcome sin, conscience, and death. Only Christians have this kind of teaching and are equipped and armed with it, so that they can overcome sin, despair, and eternal death. It is a teaching that is given only by God; it does not proceed from free will, nor was it invented by human reason or wisdom. These two words, “grace” and “peace,” contain a summary of all of Christianity. Grace contains the forgiveness of sins, a joyful peace, and a quiet conscience. But peace is impossible unless sin has first been forgiven, for the Law accuses and terrifies the conscience on account of sin. And the sin that the conscience feels cannot be removed by pilgrimages, vigils, labors, efforts, vows, or any other works; in fact, sin is increased by works. The more we work and sweat to extricate ourselves from sin, the worse off we are. For there is no way to remove sin except by grace… Because the world does not understand this doctrine, it neither can nor will tolerate it. It brags about free will, about our powers, about our works—all these as means by which to earn and attain grace and peace, that is, the forgiveness of sins and a joyful conscience. But the conscience cannot be quiet and joyful unless it has peace through this grace, that is, through the forgiveness of sins promised in Christ… Therefore your bones and mine will know no rest until we hear the Word of grace and cling to it firmly and faithfully.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

The Gospel shows the Father’s grace, Who sent His Son to save our race,
Proclaims how Jesus lived and died That we might thus be justified.—The
Gospel Shows the Father’s Grace (LSB 580:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God of truth, You converted the apostle Paul from persecutor of the Church to courageous preacher of the true Gospel that Jesus Christ gave Himself for our sins to deliver us from the present evil age. Deliver us from all false gospels, so that we remain faithful to Christ alone, whose death and resurrection are the source of our salvation; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1055)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession XXVIII 61–78

[61] There are monstrous debates about changing the law, ceremonies of the new law, and changing the Sabbath Day. They have all sprung from the false belief that in the Church there must be something similar to the services set forth in Leviticus [1–7], and that Christ had commissioned the apostles and bishops to come up with new ceremonies necessary to salvation.

[62] These errors crept into the Church when the righteousness that comes through faith was not taught clearly enough.

[63] Some debate whether or not keeping the Lord’s Day is not a divine right, but similar to it. They prescribe the extent to which it is lawful to work on holy days.

[64] What else are such disputes except traps for the conscience? Even when they try to modify the traditions, nobody will understand the modifications as long as the opinion remains that these traditions are necessary and must remain. There the righteousness of faith and Christian freedom is not known.

[65] In Acts 15:20, the apostles commanded to abstain from blood. Who observes this now? Those who choose to eat blood do not sin, for not even the apostles themselves wanted to burden consciences with bondage to traditions. They forbid the eating of the blood for a time to avoid giving offense.

[66] For in this decree we must always keep in mind what the aim of the Gospel is.

[67] Scarcely any canon laws are kept with exactness. From day to day many go out of use, even among those who are the most zealous advocates of traditions.

[68] In order to treat the conscience properly, we must realize that canon laws are to be kept without regarding them as necessary. No harm is done to the conscience even though traditions may go out of use.

[69] The bishops might easily retain the legitimate obedience of the people if they would not insist upon the observance of traditions that cannot be kept with a good conscience.

[70] Instead, they command celibacy and accept no preachers—unless they swear that they will not teach the Gospel’s pure doctrine.

[71] The churches are not asking the bishops to restore concord at the expense of their honor, even though it would be proper for good pastors to do this.

[72] They ask only that the bishops release unjust burdens that are new and have been received contrary to the custom of the universal Church.

[73] It may be that in the beginning there were plausible reasons for some of these ordinances, but they are not adapted to later times.

[74] It is also clear that some were adopted through erroneous ideas. Therefore, it would be in keeping with the popes’ mercy to change them now. Such a modification does not shake the Church’s unity. Many human traditions have been changed over time, as the canons themselves show.

[75] But if it is impossible for the adversaries to change those traditions, which they say is sinful to change, we must follow the apostolic rule, which commands us to “obey God rather than men” (Acts 5:29).

[76] In 1 Peter 5:3, Peter forbids bishops to be lords and rule over the churches.

[77] It is not our intention to take oversight away from the bishops. We ask only this one thing, that they allow the Gospel to be taught purely, and that they relax a few observances that they claim it is sinful to change.

[78] If they will not give anything up, it is for them to decide how they will give an account to God for causing schism by their stubbornness.

## Conclusion

[1] These are the chief articles that seem to be in controversy. We could have mentioned more abuses.

[2] But here we have set forth only the chief points in order to avoid making this Confession too long. From these chief points the rest may be easily judged. There have been, for example, great complaints about indulgences, pilgrimages, and the abuse of excommunication. Our parishes have been troubled in many ways by dealers in indulgences. There were endless arguments between the pastors and the monks about who has the right in parishes to hear confessions, do funerals, give sermons on extraordinary occasions, and innumerable other things.

[3] We have passed over such issues so that the chief points in this matter, briefly set forth, might be more easily understood.

[4] Nothing has been said or brought up for the rebuke of anyone.

[5] We have mentioned only those things we thought it was necessary to talk about so that it would be understood that in doctrine and ceremonies we have received nothing contrary to Scripture or the Church universal. It is clear that we have been very careful to make sure no new ungodly doctrine creeps into our churches.

[6] We present these articles in accordance with Your Imperial Majesty’s edict, in order to show our Confession and let people see a summary of our teachers’ doctrine.

[7] If there is anything that anyone might desire in this Confession, we are ready, God willing, to present more thorough information according to the Scriptures.
