# July 11

## Psalmody

1Give ear to my words, | O LORD;* consider my | groaning. 2Give attention to the sound of my cry, my King | and my God,* for to you | do I pray. 3O LORD, in the morning you | hear my voice;* in the morning I prepare a sacrifice for | you and watch. 4For you are not a God who delightsin | wickedness;* evil may not | dwell with you. 5The boastful shall not stand be- | fore your eyes;* you hate all evil- | doers. 6You destroy those | who speak lies;* the LORD abhors the bloodthirsty and de- | ceitful man. 7But I, through the abundance of your steadfast love, will en- | ter your house.* I will bow down toward your holy temple in the | fear of you. 8Lead me, O LORD, in your righteousness because of my | enemies;* make your way straight be- | fore me.—Psalm 5:1–8
Additional Psalm: Psalm 5

## Old Testament Reading: Judges 6:25–40

[The Call of Gideon]

25That night the LORD said to him, “Take your father’s bull, and the second bull seven years old, and pull down the altar of Baal that your father has, and cut down the Asherah that is beside it 26and build an altar to the LORD your God on the top of the stronghold here, with stones laid in due order. Then take the second bull and offer it as a burnt offering with the wood of the Asherah that you shall cut down.” 27So Gideon took ten men of his servants and did as the LORD had told him. But because he was too afraid of his family and the men of the town to do it by day, he did it by night.

Gideon Destroys the Altar of Baal

28When the men of the town rose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was broken down, and the Asherah beside it was cut down, and the second bull was offered on the altar that had been built. 29And they said to one another, “Who has done this thing?” And after they had searched and inquired, they said, “Gideon the son of Joash has done this thing.” 30Then the men of the town said to Joash, “Bring out your son, that he may die, for he has broken down the altar of Baal and cut down the Asherah beside it.” 31But Joash said to all who stood against him, “Will you contend for Baal? Or will you save him? Whoever contends for him shall be put to death by morning. If he is a god, let him contend for himself, because his altar has been broken down.” 32Therefore on that day Gideon was called Jerubbaal, that is to say, “Let Baal contend against him,” because he broke down his altar. 33Now all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the people of the East came together, and they crossed the Jordan and encamped in the Valley of Jezreel. 34But the Spirit of the LORD clothed Gideon, and he sounded the trumpet, and the Abiezrites were called out to follow him. 35And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh, and they too were called out to follow him. And he sent messengers to Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali, and they went up to meet them.

The Sign of the Fleece

36Then Gideon said to God, “If you will save Israel by my hand, as you have said, 37behold, I am laying a fleece of wool on the threshing floor. If there is dew on the fleece alone, and it is dry on all the ground, then I shall know that you will save Israel by my hand, as you have said.” 38And it was so. When he rose early next morning and squeezed the fleece, he wrung enough dew from the fleece to fill a bowl with water. 39Then Gideon said to God, “Let not your anger burn against me; let me speak just once more. Please let me test just once more with the fleece. Please let it be dry on the fleece only, and on all the ground let there be dew.” 40And God did so that night; and it was dry on the fleece only, and on all the ground there was dew.

## New Testament Reading: Acts 15:6–21

[The Jerusalem Council]

6The apostles and the elders were gathered together to consider this matter. 7And after there had been much debate, Peter stood up and said to them, “Brothers, you know that in the early days God made a choice among you, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of the gospel and believe. 8And God, who knows the heart, bore witness to them, by giving them the Holy Spirit just as he did to us, 9and he made no distinction between us and them, having cleansed their hearts by faith. 10Now, therefore, why are you putting God to the test by placing a yoke on the neck of the disciples that neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear? 11But we believe that we will be saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they will.” 12And all the assembly fell silent, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul as they related what signs and wonders God had done through them among the Gentiles. 13After they finished speaking, James replied, “Brothers, listen to me. 14Simeon has related how God first visited the Gentiles, to take from them a people for his name. 15And with this the words of the prophets agree, just as it is written, 16“‘After this I will return, and I will rebuild the tent of David that has fallen; I will rebuild its ruins, and I will restore it, 17that the remnant of mankind may seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles who are called by my name, says the Lord, who makes these things 18known from of old.’ 19Therefore my judgment is that we should not trouble those of the Gentiles who turn to God, 20but should write to them to abstain from the things polluted by idols, and from sexual immorality, and from what has been strangled, and from blood. 21For from ancient generations Moses has had in every city those who proclaim him, for he is read every Sabbath in the synagogues.”

## Writing

A Hymn to God the Father Wilt Thou forgive that sin where I begun, Which was my sin, though it were done before? Wilt Thou forgivell that sin through which I run, And do run still, though still I do deplore? When Thou hast done, Thou hast not done; For I have more. Wilt Thou forgive that sin which I have won Others to sin, and made my sin their door? Wilt Thou forgive that sin which I did shun A year or two, but wallow’d in, a score? When Thou hast done, Thou hast not done; For I have more. I have a sin of fear, that when I have spun My last thread, I shall perish on the shore; But swear by Thyself, that at my death Thy Son Shall shine as He shines now, and heretofore: And, having done that, Thou hast done; I fear no more.—John Donne

## Hymnody

People and realms of ev’ry tongue Dwell on His love with sweetest song;
And infant voices shall proclaim Their early blessings on His name.—Jesus
Shall Reign (LSB 832:3)

## Prayer of the Day

O almighty and most merciful God, at the apostolic council, You gave Peter the courage to represent Paul and gave James the wisdom to show from Scripture that the Gentiles are also called by Your name. May Your Church continue boldly to proclaim that salvation is by grace through faith and not by works of Law; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1054)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Augsburg Confession XXVIII 43–60

[43] There are clear testimonies that forbid creating traditions in such a way as to suggest that they merit grace or are necessary to salvation.

[44] Paul says in Colossians 2:16, “Therefore let no one pass judgment on you in questions of food and drink, or with regard to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath.” And later:

[45] If with Christ you died to the elemental spirits of the world, why, as if you were still alive in the world, do you submit to regulations—‘Do not handle, Do not taste, Do not touch’ (referring to things that all perish as they are used)—according to human precepts and teachings? These have indeed an appearance of wisdom. (Colossians 2:20–23)

[46] Also in Titus 1:14 he openly forbids traditions with these words: “not devoting themselves to Jewish myths and the commands of people who turn away from the truth.”

[47] In Matthew 15:14, Christ says of those who require traditions, “Let them alone; they are blind guides.”

[48] In verse 13 He rejects such services: “Every plant that My heavenly Father has not planted will be rooted up.”

[49] If bishops have the right to burden churches with infinite traditions, and to snare consciences, why does Scripture so often forbid making and listening to traditions? Why does it call them “teachings of demons” (1 Timothy 4:1)? Did the Holy Spirit warn of these things in vain?

[50] Therefore, ordinances instituted as though they are necessary, or with the view that they merit grace, are contrary to the Gospel. Therefore, it follows that it is not lawful for any bishop to institute and require such services.

[51] It is necessary that the doctrine of Christian freedom be preserved in the churches. In other words, the bondage of the Law is not necessary in order to be justified, as it is written in the Epistle to the Galatians, “do not submit again to a yoke of slavery” (5:1).

[52] It is necessary for the chief article of the Gospel to be preserved, namely that we obtain grace freely by faith in Christ, and not by certain observances or acts of worship devised by people.

[53] What, then, are we to think of the Sunday rites, and similar things, in God’s house? We answer that it is lawful for bishops, or pastors, to make ordinances so that things will be done orderly in the Church, but not to teach that we merit grace or make satisfaction for sins. Consciences are not bound to regard them as necessary services and to think that it is a sin to break them without offense to others.

[54] So in 1 Corinthians 11:5, Paul concludes that women should cover their heads in the congregation and in 1 Corinthians 14:30, that interpreters be heard in order in the church, and so on.

[55] It is proper that the churches keep such ordinances for the sake of love and tranquility, to avoid giving offense to another, so that all things be done in the churches in order, and without confusion (1 Corinthians 14:40; comp. Philippians 2:14).

[56] It is proper to keep such ordinances just so long as consciences are not burdened to think that they are necessary to salvation, or to regard it as sin if they are changed without offending others. For instance, no one will say that a woman sins who goes out in public with her head uncovered, as long as no offense is given.

[57] This kind of ordinance in the Church is observing the Lord’s Day, Easter, Pentecost, and similar holy days and rites.

[58] It is a great error for anyone to think that it is by the authority of the Church that we observe the Lord’s Day as something necessary, instead of the Sabbath Day.

[59] Scripture itself has abolished the Sabbath Day [Colossians 2:16–17]. It teaches that since the Gospel has been revealed, all the ceremonies of Moses can be omitted.

[60] Yet, because it was necessary to appoint a certain day for the people to know when they ought to come together, it appears that the Church designated the Lord’s Day [Revelation 1:10] for this purpose. This day seems to have been chosen all the more for this additional reason: so people might have an example of Christian freedom and might know that keeping neither the Sabbath nor any other day is necessary.
