# July 16

## Psalmody

1O LORD, in your strength the king re- | joices,* and in your salvation how greatly | he exults! 2You have given him his | heart’s desire* and have not withheld the request | of his lips. 3For you meet him with rich | blessings;* you set a crown of fine gold up- | on his head. 4He asked life of you; you gave | it to him,* length of days forever and | ever. 5His glory is great through your sal- | vation;* splendor and majesty you be- | stow on him. 6For you make him most blessed for- | ever;* you make him glad with the joy of your | presence. 7For the king trusts | in the LORD,* and through the steadfast love of the Most High he shall | not be moved.—Psalm 21:1–7
Additional Psalm: Psalm 21

## Old Testament Reading: Judges 16:4–30

[Samson and Delilah]

4After this he loved a woman in the Valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah. 5And the lords of the Philistines came up to her and said to her, “Seduce him, and see where his great strength lies, and by what means we may overpower him, that we may bind him to humble him. And we will each give you 1,100 pieces of silver.” 6So Delilah said to Samson, “Please tell me where your great strength lies, and how you might be bound, that one could subdue you.” 7Samson said to her, “If they bind me with seven fresh bowstrings that have not been dried, then I shall become weak and be like any other man.” 8Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven fresh bowstrings that had not been dried, and she bound him with them. 9Now she had men lying in ambush in an inner chamber. And she said to him, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” But he snapped the bowstrings, as a thread of flax snaps when it touches the fire. So the secret of his strength was not known. 10Then Delilah said to Samson, “Behold, you have mocked me and told me lies. Please tell me how you might be bound.” 11And he said to her, “If they bind me with new ropes that have not been used, then I shall become weak and be like any other man.” 12So Delilah took new ropes and bound him with them and said to him, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” And the men lying in ambush were in an inner chamber. But he snapped the ropes off his arms like a thread. 13Then Delilah said to Samson, “Until now you have mocked me and told me lies. Tell me how you might be bound.” And he said to her, “If you weave the seven locks of my head with the web and fasten it tight with the pin, then I shall become weak and be like any other man.” 14So while he slept, Delilah took the seven locks of his head and wove them into the web. And she made them tight with the pin and said to him, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” But he awoke from his sleep and pulled away the pin, the loom, and the web. 15And she said to him, “How can you say, ‘I love you,’ when your heart is not with me? You have mocked me these three times, and you have not told me where your great strength lies.” 16And when she pressed him hard with her words day after day, and urged him, his soul was vexed to death. 17And he told her all his heart, and said to her, “A razor has never come upon my head, for I have been a Nazirite to God from my mother’s womb. If my head is shaved, then my strength will leave me, and I shall become weak and be like any other man.” 18When Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called the lords of the Philistines, saying, “Come up again, for he has told me all his heart.” Then the lords of the Philistines came up to her and brought the money in their hands. 19She made him sleep on her knees. And she called a man and had him shave off the seven locks of his head. Then she began to torment him, and his strength left him. 20And she said, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” And he awoke from his sleep and said, “I will go out as at other times and shake myself free.” But he did not know that the LORD had left him. 21And the Philistines seized him and gouged out his eyes and brought him down to Gaza and bound him with bronze shackles. And he ground at the mill in the prison. 22But the hair of his head began to grow again after it had been shaved.

The Death of Samson

23Now the lords of the Philistines gathered to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon their god and to rejoice, and they said, “Our god has given Samson our enemy into our hand.” 24And when the people saw him, they praised their god. For they said, “Our god has given our enemy into our hand, the ravager of our country, who has killed many of us.” 25And when their hearts were merry, they said, “Call Samson, that he may entertain us.” So they called Samson out of the prison, and he entertained them. They made him stand between the pillars. 26And Samson said to the young man who held him by the hand, “Let me feel the pillars on which the house rests, that I may lean against them.” 27Now the house was full of men and women. All the lords of the Philistines were there, and on the roof there were about 3,000 men and women, who looked on while Samson entertained. 28Then Samson called to the LORD and said, “O Lord GOD, please remember me and please strengthen me only this once, O God, that I may be avenged on the Philistines for my two eyes.” 29And Samson grasped the two middle pillars on which the house rested, and he leaned his weight against them, his right hand on the one and his left hand on the other. 30And Samson said, “Let me die with the Philistines.” Then he bowed with all his strength, and the house fell upon the lords and upon all the people who were in it. So the dead whom he killed at his death were more than those whom he had killed during his life. Additional Reading: Judges 17:1–21:25

## New Testament Reading: Galatians 4:12–31

[Paul’s Concern for the Galatians]

12Brothers, I entreat you, become as I am, for I also have become as you are. You did me no wrong. 13You know it was because of a bodily ailment that I preached the gospel to you at first, 14and though my condition was a trial to you, you did not scorn or despise me, but received me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus. 15What then has become of the blessing you felt? For I testify to you that, if possible, you would have gouged out your eyes and given them to me. 16Have I then become your enemy by telling you the truth? 17They make much of you, but for no good purpose. They want to shut you out, that you may make much of them. 18It is always good to be made much of for a good purpose, and not only when I am present with you, 19my little children, for whom I am again in the anguish of childbirth until Christ is formed in you! 20I wish I could be present with you now and change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.

Example of Hagar and Sarah

21Tell me, you who desire to be under the law, do you not listen to the law? 22For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by a slave woman and one by a free woman. 23But the son of the slave was born according to the flesh, while the son of the free woman was born through promise. 24Now this may be interpreted allegorically: these women are two covenants. One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery; she is Hagar. 25Now Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia; she corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery with her children. 26But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother. 27For it is written, “Rejoice, O barren one who does not bear; break forth and cry aloud, you who are not in labor! For the children of the desolate one will be more than those of the one who has a husband.” 28Now you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of promise. 29But just as at that time he who was born according to the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the Spirit, so also it is now. 30But what does the Scripture say? “Cast out the slave woman and her son, for the son of the slave woman shall not inherit with the son of the free woman.” 31So, brothers, we are not children of the slave but of the free woman.

## Writing

Heavenly Father, we have certainly deserved Your punishment. You may surely use the devil, pope, or Muslims as Your rod of anger against us. But they want us, together with themselves, to sin atrociously against You. For they are not concerned whether we have disobeyed or slandered You or indulged in all kinds of idolatry and immorality as they do. However, our sin against them is that we preach, believe, and profess You, God Father, Your Son, and the Holy Spirit, the one and right eternal God. But, where we have denied You, the devil, world, pope, and Muslims would leave us in peace, as Your dear Son says: “If you were of the world, so the world would love you” (John 15:19). Do look on us, merciful Father and Judge of our enemies! For they are really Your enemies, and if they persecute and attack us, so persecute and attack them Yourself. For the Word that we preach, believe, and profess is the work of the Holy Spirit in us. Muslims want to set their Muhammad in the place of Your dear Son, Jesus Christ. They slander Him and say that He is no real God and Muhammad is greater and better than He is. If it is sin that we hold You, the Father, Your Son, and the Holy Spirit to be the right and only God, and so confess and praise You, then You would Yourself be the sinner who calls us to that. When they therefore hate, attack, and punish us, they do this to You. Therefore, awake, dear Lord God, and sanctify Your name that they defame; strengthen Your kingdom that they would destroy in us; and accomplish Your will that they would suppress in us. Let Yourself not be trodden underfoot because of our sin by those who want to annihilate in us Your holy Word, name, and work, so that You would be no God and have no people who proclaim, believe, and profess You.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

By grace I’m saved, grace free and boundless; My soul, believe and doubt it
not. Why stagger at this word of promise? Has Scripture ever falsehood
taught? No! Then this word must true remain: By grace you too will life
obtain.—By Grace I’m Saved (LSB 566:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Faithful God, You promised to preserve Your people and save Your inheritance, using unlikely and unexpected vessels in extending the genealogy that would bring about the birth of Your blessed Son. Give us the loyalty of Ruth and her trust in the one true God, that we, too, might honor You through our submission and respect and be counted among Your chosen people, by the grace of Jesus Christ, our Lord, and the Holy Spirit, who reign together with You, now and forever. (1058) Ruth Ruth of Moab, the subject of the biblical book that bears her name, is an inspiring example of God’s grace. Although she was a Gentile, God made her the great-grandmother of King David (Ruth 4:17) and an ancestress of Jesus Himself (Matthew 1:5). A famine in Israel led Elimelech and Naomi of Bethlehem to immigrate to the neighboring nation of Moab with their two sons. The sons married Moabite women, Orpah and Ruth, but after about ten years, Elimelech and his sons died (Ruth 1:1–5). Naomi then decided to return to Bethlehem and urged her daughters-in-law to return to their families. Orpah listened to Naomi’s advice, but Ruth refused, replying with the stirring words, “Where you go I will go, and where you lodge I will lodge. Your people shall be my people, and your God my God” (Ruth 1:16). After Ruth arrived in Bethlehem, Boaz, a close relative of Elimelech, agreed to be Ruth’s “redeemer” (Ruth 3:7–13; 4:9–12). He took her as his wife, and Ruth gave birth to Obed, the grandfather of David (Ruth 4:13– 17), thus preserving the messianic line. Ruth’s kindness and selfless loyalty toward Naomi and her faith in Naomi’s God have long endeared her to the faithful and redounded to God’s praise for His merciful choice of one so unexpected.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession II (I) 5–22

[5] Some of them claim that original sin is not a depravity or corruption in human nature, but only servitude, or a condition of mortality. ‹They say that it is not inherent in our nature, but is rather a burden› put on us ‹as a result of Adam’s sin›, not that we have any such depravity of our own. Besides, they add that no one is condemned to eternal death on account of original sin, just as a child born of a slave woman becomes a slave not as a result of any personal fault, but as a result of his mother’s condition.

[6] To show that this impious opinion is displeasing to us, we used the word concupiscence. With the best intention, we have explained this term as “diseases” and said that “the nature of human beings is born corrupt and full of faults.”

[7] We have not only used the word concupiscence, but we have also said that “the fear of God and faith are lacking.” We added this comment because the scholastic teachers do not understand the definition of original sin well enough. They take what they received from the Fathers and extend the definition of original sin. They argue that the evil inclination (fomes) is a quality (like a blemish) on the body. With their usual folly, they ask whether this quality is caused from the contagiousness of the apple or from the breath of the serpent, and whether medicines can cure the condition. They suppress the main point with such questions.

[8] So, when they talk about original sin, they do not mention the more serious faults of human nature, such as ignorance of God, contempt for God, total lack of fear of God and confidence in God, hatred of God’s judgment, fleeing from God when He judges us, anger toward God, despairing of God’s grace, putting trust in things of this world, and so forth. The Scholastics do not notice all these diseases that are totally contrary to God’s Law. They even say that human nature is entirely capable of loving God above all things and fulfilling God’s commandments “according to the substance of the act.” These diseases are totally contrary to God’s Law, but the Scholastics do not notice them. They do not even realize that they are contradicting themselves.

[9] For what else is being able, by one’s own strength, to love God above all things and fulfill His commandments except original righteousness?

[10] If human nature is so strong that it is able, on its own, to love God above all things, as the Scholastics confidently affirm, what then is original sin? Why do we need Christ’s grace if we can be justified as a result of our own righteousness? Why do we need the Holy Spirit if we are strong enough on our own to love God above all things and fulfill God’s commandments?

[11] Is there anyone who does not realize that our adversaries’ ideas are absurd? They recognize the less serious diseases in human nature, but the more serious they do not even acknowledge. Scripture everywhere warns us, as the Prophets constantly complain, about putting our confidence in our human abilities, contempt for God, hating God, and similar faults with which we are born. [See Psalm 13 and other passages, such as Psalm 14:1–3; 140:3; 36:1.]

[12] After the Scholastics mixed philosophical speculations about the perfection of nature [the light of reason] with Christian doctrine, they credited more than was possible to the ability of free will. They taught that people are justified before God by philosophical or civic righteousness. We, too, confess that such things are subject to reason, and so to some degree are within our power. However, as a result of their speculations they could not see the inner uncleanness of human nature.

[13] This can only be evaluated and understood on the basis of God’s Word, which the Scholastics do not use very often in their discussions.

[14] These were the reasons why we also mentioned concupiscence in our description of original sin, and why we deny to human nature the ability to fear and trust in God. We wanted to show that original sin contains these diseases: ignorance of God, contempt for God, not having fear and trust in God, the inability to love God. These are the chief faults of human nature because they conflict with the First Table of the Ten Commandments [Exodus 20:3–11].

[15] We have not said anything new. The ancient definition of original sin, understood correctly, says precisely the same thing. “Original sin is the absence of original righ-teousness.” But what is righteousness? Here the Scholastics wrangle over philosophical questions. They do not explain what original righteousness is.

[16] In the Scriptures, righ-teousness consists not only in obeying the Second Table of the Ten Commandments ‹which are about good works in serving our fellowman›, but also the First Table, which teaches about fearing God, faith, and loving God.

[17] Therefore, original righteousness includes not only physical health in all ways, as they contend, but also these gifts: a sure and certain knowledge of God, fear of God, confidence in God, and the desire and ability to give God these things.

[18] Scripture testifies to this when it says in Genesis 1:27 that man was made in the image and likeness of God. What else was this image and likeness other than that man was created with wisdom and righteousness so that he could apprehend God and reflect God? Mankind was given the gift of knowing God, fearing God, and being confident in God.

[19] This is how Irenaeus and Ambrose interpret the likeness to God. Ambrose not only says many things to this effect, but especially declares, “That soul is not, therefore, in the image of God, in which God is not [dwelling] at all times.”

[20] Paul shows in Ephesians 5:9 and Colossians 3:10 that the image of God is the knowledge of God, righteousness, and truth.

[21] Lombard is not afraid to say that original righteousness “is the very likeness to God which God implanted in man.”

[22] We recount the opinions of the ancients, which in no way interfere with Augustine’s interpretation of the image.
