# July 18

## Psalmody

1May the LORD answer you in the day of | trouble!* May the name of the God of Jacob pro- | tect you! 2May he send you help from the sanctu- | ary* and give you support from | Zion! 3May he remember all your | offerings* and regard with favor your burnt sacri- | fices! 4May he grant you your | heart’s desire* and fulfill | all your plans! 5May we shout for joy over your salvation, and in the name of our God set up our | banners!* May the LORD fulfill all your pe- | titions! 6Now I know that the LORD saves his a- | nointed;* he will answer him from his holy heaven with the saving might of his | right hand. 7Some trust in chariots and some in | horses,* but we trust in the name of the | LORD our God. 8They col- | lapse and fall,* but we rise and | stand upright. 9O LORD, | save the king!* May he answer us | when we call.—Psalm 20
Additional Psalm: Psalm 131

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 1:21–2:17

Samuel Given to the LORD

21The man Elkanah and all his house went up to offer to the LORD the yearly sacrifice and to pay his vow. 22But Hannah did not go up, for she said to her husband, “As soon as the child is weaned, I will bring him, so that he may appear in the presence of the LORD and dwell there forever.” 23Elkanah her husband said to her, “Do what seems best to you; wait until you have weaned him; only, may the LORD establish his word.” So the woman remained and nursed her son until she weaned him. 24And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, along with a three-year-old bull, an ephah of flour, and a skin of wine, and she brought him to the house of the LORD at Shiloh. And the child was young. 25Then they slaughtered the bull, and they brought the child to Eli. 26And she said, “Oh, my lord! As you live, my lord, I am the woman who was standing here in your presence, praying to the LORD. 27For this child I prayed, and the LORD has granted me my petition that I made to him. 28Therefore I have lent him to the LORD. As long as he lives, he is lent to the LORD.” And he worshiped the LORD there.

Hannah’s Prayer

2:1And Hannah prayed and said, “My heart exults in the LORD; my strength is exalted in the LORD. My mouth derides my enemies, because I rejoice in your salvation. 2“There is none holy like the LORD; there is none besides you; there is no rock like our God. 3Talk no more so very proudly, let not arrogance come from your mouth; for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. 4The bows of the mighty are broken, but the feeble bind on strength. 5Those who were full have hired themselves out for bread, but those who were hungry have ceased to hunger. The barren has borne seven, but she who has many children is forlorn. 6The LORD kills and brings to life; he brings down to Sheol and raises up. 7The LORD makes poor and makes rich; he brings low and he exalts. 8He raises up the poor from the dust; he lifts the needy from the ash heap to make them sit with princes and inherit a seat of honor. For the pillars of the earth are the LORD’s, and on them he has set the world. 9“He will guard the feet of his faithful ones, but the wicked shall be cut off in darkness, for not by might shall a man prevail. 10The adversaries of the LORD shall be broken to pieces; against them he will thunder in heaven. The LORD will judge the ends of the earth; he will give strength to his king and exalt the power of his anointed.” 11Then Elkanah went home to Ramah. And the boy ministered to the LORD in the presence of Eli the priest.

Eli’s Worthless Sons

1 2Now the sons of Eli were worthless men. They did not know the LORD. 13The custom of the priests with the people was that when any man offered sacrifice, the priest’s servant would come, while the meat was boiling, with a three-pronged fork in his hand, 14and he would thrust it into the pan or kettle or cauldron or pot. All that the fork brought up the priest would take for himself. This is what they did at Shiloh to all the Israelites who came there. 15Moreover, before the fat was burned, the priest’s servant would come and say to the man who was sacrificing, “Give meat for the priest to roast, for he will not accept boiled meat from you but only raw.” 16And if the man said to him, “Let them burn the fat first, and then take as much as you wish,” he would say, “No, you must give it now, and if not, I will take it by force.” 17Thus the sin of the young men was very great in the sight of the LORD, for the men treated the offering of the LORD with contempt.

## New Testament Reading: Galatians 6:1–18

Bear One Another’s Burdens

1Brothers, if anyone is caught in any transgression, you who are spiritual should restore him in a spirit of gentleness. Keep watch on yourself, lest you too be tempted. 2Bear one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. 3For if anyone thinks he is something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. 4But let each one test his own work, and then his reason to boast will be in himself alone and not in his neighbor. 5For each will have to bear his own load. 6One who is taught the word must share all good things with the one who teaches. 7Do not be deceived: God is not mocked, for whatever one sows, that will he also reap. 8For the one who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption, but the one who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life. 9And let us not grow weary of doing good, for in due season we will reap, if we do not give up. 10So then, as we have opportunity, let us do good to everyone, and especially to those who are of the household of faith.

Final Warning and Benediction

11See with what large letters I am writing to you with my own hand. 12It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh who would force you to be circumcised, and only in order that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ. 13For even those who are circumcised do not themselves keep the law, but they desire to have you circumcised that they may boast in your flesh. 14But far be it from me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world. 15For neither circumcision counts for anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation. 16And as for all who walk by this rule, peace and mercy be upon them, and upon the Israel of God. 17From now on let no one cause me trouble, for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus. 18The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.

## Writing

Thus everywhere love finds something to bear, something to do. Moreover, love is the law of Christ. But to love means to wish from the heart what is good for the other person, or to seek the other person’s advantage. Now if there were no one who errs or falls—that is, no one who needs what is good—whom are you going to love, whose good are you going to desire, whose good are you going to seek?… “Let us do good to all men,” to heathen, Jews, the thankful, the unthankful, friends, enemies, neighbors, strangers. In short, just as is said of love, no person is regarded. Behold, how great the breadth of Christian benevolence is! For it must be all-encompas-sing, as Christ also says in Matt. 5:46: “If you love those who love you, what reward have you? Do not even the tax collectors do this?” Nevertheless, Paul gives precedence to those who are of the household of faith, because we have been bound to them with a closer tie, inasmuch as they are from the same house, the church, and from the same household of Christ, and have one faith, one Baptism, one hope, one Lord, and everything the same.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast Save in the death of Christ, my God; All
the vain things that charm me most, I sacrifice them to His blood.—When I
Survey the Wondrous Cross (LSB 426:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O Lord, keep Your household, the Church, in continual godliness that through Your protection she may be free from all adversities and devoutly given to serve You in good works; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (H81)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession II (I) 35–51

[35] Here our adversaries attack Martin Luther because he wrote that “original sin remains after Baptism.” They add that this point was justly condemned by Leo X. But His Imperial Majesty will discover a clear slander on this point. Our adversaries know in what sense Luther intended this remark that original sin remains after Baptism. Luther always writes that Baptism removes the guilt of original sin. However, the material, as they call it, of the sin (concupiscence) remains. He also adds that the Holy Spirit, given through Baptism, begins to put to death the concupiscence and begins to create

[36] new movements within a person. Augustine speaks in the same way when he says, “Sin is forgiven in Baptism, not in such a way that it no longer exists, but so that it is not charged.” Here he confesses openly that sin exists. It remains, although it is not counted against us any longer. Augustine’s judgment on this point was so agreeable to those who came after him that it is often quoted in the decrees of Church councils. In Against Julian, Augustine says:

The Law, which is in the members, has been overturned by spiritual regeneration and remains in the mortal flesh. It has been overturned because the guilt has been forgiven in the Sacrament, by which believers are born again; but it remains, because it produces desires, against which believers struggle.

[37] Our adversaries know that Luther believes and teaches this, and since they cannot deny this, they instead try to pervert his words in an effort to crush an innocent man.

[38] They argue that concupiscence is a penalty, but not a sin. Luther maintains that it is a sin. It has been said above that Augustine defines original sin as concupiscence. If they don’t like this, then let them argue with Augustine. Besides, Paul says in Romans 7:7,

[39] “I would not have known what it is to covet [concupiscence] if the law had not said, ‘You shall not covet.’ ” Likewise, “I see in my members another law waging war against the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members” (Romans 7:23).

[40] No amount of sophistry can overthrow these points. They clearly call concupiscence sin, which is not charged against those who are in Christ [Romans 8:1], although by nature it is deserving of death [Romans 6:23] where it is not forgiven.

[41] All controversies aside, this is what the Fathers believe. Augustine, in a long discussion, refutes the opinion of those who think that concupiscence in a person is not a fault, but merely an incidental and inconsequential matter just as color of the body or ill health is said to be an adiaphoron.

[42] But when our adversaries argue that the evil inclination (fomes) is an adiaphoron, not only many passages of Scripture, but simply the entire Church, contradict them. Who has ever dared to say that the following things, even if perfect agreement could not be reached, are indifferent matters: doubt about God’s wrath, His grace, God’s Word, anger at the judgments of God, being provoked because God does not at once deliver one from afflictions, murmuring because the wicked enjoy a better fortune than the good, to be urged on by wrath, lust, the desire for glory, wealth, and so on?

[43] Godly people acknowledge these things in themselves, as appears in the Psalms and the Prophets. But in the scholastic academies they took from philosophy entirely different ideas: desires and inclinations are neither good nor evil, neither praiseworthy nor worthy of blame. Likewise, that sin is only sin if it is a voluntary action. Philosophers were expressing such ideas about civil righteousness, not about God’s judgment. They unwisely add other ideas as well, saying that nature is not evil. Properly understood, we do not reject this idea, but it is not right to take this understanding of what God creates as good and apply it to original sin. This is precisely what we read in the works of the Scholastics, who wrongly mingle philosophy or civil teachings about ethics with the Gospel.

[44] These matters were not only disputed in the schools, but as is usually the case, were carried from the schools to the people. These teachings prevailed and nourished confidence in human strength and suppressed the knowledge of Christ’s grace.

[45] Therefore, Luther wanted to declare how great the consequences of original sin are and how weak human beings are as a result. So he taught that these remnants of original sin [after Baptism] are not, by nature, adiaphora in people, but that we need Christ’s grace so that they are not counted against us as sin. And, to put them to death [mortify them], we need the Holy Spirit [Romans 8:13].

[46] The Scholastics minimize sin and punishment when they teach that people can fulfill God’s commandments under their own power. But in Genesis, the punishment imposed because of original sin is described differently. For there human nature is subjected not only to death and other bodily evils, but also to the devil’s kingdom. In Genesis 3:15, there is this fearful sentence that proclaims, “I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring.”

[47] Defects and concupiscence are both sin and punishment. Death and other bodily evils, and the dominion of the devil, are properly understood to be punishments. Human nature has been delivered into slavery and is held captive by the devil [Colossians 1:13]. He fills human nature with a passionate desire for wicked opinions and errors and pushes it to sins of every kind.

[48] Just as the devil cannot be conquered except by Christ’s help, so we cannot free ourselves from this slavery by our own strength.

[49] World history shows how great and powerful the devil’s kingdom is. The world is full of blasphemies against God and wicked opinions. The devil keeps all tied up many hypocrites who appear holy and who are wise and righteous in the world’s eyes. Even greater vices are seen in other people.

[50] Since Christ was given to us to remove both these sins and these punishments and to destroy the devil’s kingdom, sin, and death [1 John 3:8], we will never be able to recognize Christ’s benefits unless we understand our evils. For this reason our preachers have diligently taught all about these things. They have not delivered anything that is new, but have set forth Holy Scripture and the judgment of the Holy Fathers.

[51] We think this will satisfy His Imperial Majesty about the childish and trivial sophistry the adversaries use to pervert our article on original sin. We know that we believe correctly, in harmony with the Church catholic of Christ. If the adversaries renew this controversy, there will be more than enough of us to reply and to defend the truth. In this case our adversaries, to a great extent, do not understand what they are saying. They often speak in a contradictory way and do not explain, either correctly or logically, what is the essence of original sin and what they call a “defect.” We are unwilling here to examine their arguments in any further subtle detail. We think it is worthwhile just to recite, in customary and well-known words, the belief of the Holy Fathers, which we also follow.
