# July 29

## Psalmody

41Let your steadfast love cometo me, | O LORD,* your salvation according to your | promise; 42then shall I have an answer for him who | taunts me,* for I trust | in your word. 43And take not the word of truth utterly out | of my mouth,* for my hope is in your | just decrees. 44I will keep your law con- | tinually,* forever and | ever, 45and I shall walk in a | wide place,* for I have sought your | precepts. 46I will also speak of your testimonies be- | fore kings* and shall not be | put to shame, 47for I find my delight in yourcom- | mandments,* which | I love. 48I will lift up my hands toward your commandments, | which I love,* and I will meditate on your | statutes.—Psalm 119:41–48
Additional Psalm: Psalm 13

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 14:47–15:9

Saul Fights Israel’s Enemies

47When Saul had taken the kingship over Israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, against the Ammonites, against Edom, against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines. Wherever he turned he routed them. 48And he did valiantly and struck the Amalekites and delivered Israel out of the hands of those who plundered them. 49Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, Ishvi, and Malchi-shua. And the names of his two daughters were these: the name of the firstborn was Merab, and the name of the younger Michal. 50And the name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of the commander of his army was Abner the son of Ner, Saul’s uncle. 51Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel. 52There was hard fighting against the Philistines all the days of Saul. And when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he attached him to himself.

The LORD Rejects Saul

15:1And Samuel said to Saul, “The LORD sent me to anoint you king over his people Israel; now therefore listen to the words of the Lord. 2Thus says the LORD of hosts, ‘I have noted what Amalek did to Israel in opposing them on the way when they came up out of Egypt. 3Now go and strike Amalek and devote to destruction all that they have. Do not spare them, but kill both man and woman, child and infant, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.’” 4So Saul summoned the people and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand men on foot, and ten thousand men of Judah. 5And Saul came to the city of Amalek and lay in wait in the valley. 6Then Saul said to the Kenites, “Go, depart; go down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them. For you showed kindness to all the people of Israel when they came up out of Egypt.” So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites. 7And Saul defeated the Amalekites from Havilah as far as Shur, which is east of Egypt. 8And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive and devoted to destruction all the people with the edge of the sword. 9But Saul and the people spared Agag and the best of the sheep and of the oxen and of the fattened calves and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them. All that was despised and worthless they devoted to destruction.

## New Testament Reading: Acts 24:1–23

Paul Before Felix at Caesarea

1And after five days the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and a spokesman, one Tertullus. They laid before the governor their case against Paul. 2And when he had been summoned, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying: “Since through you we enjoy much peace, and since by your foresight, most excellent Felix, reforms are being made for this nation, 3in every way and everywhere we accept this with all gratitude. 4But, to detain you no further, I beg you in your kindness to hear us briefly. 5For we have found this man a plague, one who stirs up riots among all the Jews throughout the world and is a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. 6He even tried to profane the temple, but we seized him. 8By examining him yourself you will be able to find out from him about everything of which we accuse him.” 9The Jews also joined in the charge, affirming that all these things were so. 10And when the governor had nodded to him to speak, Paul replied: “Knowing that for many years you have been a judge over this nation, I cheerfully make my defense. 11You can verify that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem, 12and they did not find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the temple or in the synagogues or in the city. 13Neither can they prove to you what they now bring up against me. 14But this I confess to you, that according to the Way, which they call a sect, I worship the God of our fathers, believing everything laid down by the Law and written in the Prophets, 15having a hope in God, which these men themselves accept, that there will be a resurrection of both the just and the unjust. 16So I always take pains to have a clear conscience toward both God and man. 17Now after several years I came to bring alms to my nation and to present offerings. 18While I was doing this, they found me purified in the temple, without any crowd or tumult. But some Jews from Asia—19they ought to be here before you and to make an accusation, should they have anything against me. 20Or else let these men themselves say what wrongdoing they found when I stood before the council, 21other than this one thing that I cried out while standing among them: ‘It is with respect to the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial before you this day.’”

Paul Kept in Custody

22But Felix, having a rather accurate knowledge of the Way, put them off, saying, “When Lysias the tribune comes down, I will decide your case.” 23Then he gave orders to the centurion that he should be kept in custody but have some liberty, and that none of his friends should be prevented from attending to his needs.

## Writing

Beloved Christians! The godly have their manner, and it is a good manner. The evil also have their characteristic, and it is an evil characteristic. The life of Christians is that they alone believe what is written about Christ in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets; next, that they through Christ hope in the resurrection of the dead and eternal life; and, in addition, that they practice and earnestly strive to have a good conscience everywhere, both toward God through faith in Christ and toward men through blameless conduct. The life of the godless, on the other hand, is that they are terribly afraid of the preaching of the Holy Gospel and would rather not know it, lest it produce a heavy conscience; next, that they are secure and have hope that everywhere and in all things they may enjoy the benefits of the people and their prayers. Moreover, they conduct themselves and use their office in such a way that they do not lose the world’s favor. God grant that all of us, both authorities and subjects, flee the vices of the children and rulers of the world and instead follow the manner of God’s children and the Lord God’s authorities, that we may forsake the evil and do the good, and thus have God’s favor and blessing and live for His honor and for the welfare of every man, until death and our entrance into heaven. Amen.—Veit Dietrich

## Hymnody

Holy Spirit, ever living As the Church’s very life; Holy Spirit, ever striving
Through us in a ceaseless strife; Holy Spirit, ever forming In the Church the
mind of Christ: You we praise with endless worship For Your gifts and
fruits unpriced.—Holy Spirit, Ever Dwelling (LSB 650:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Heavenly Father, Your beloved Son befriended frail humans like us to make us Your own. Teach us to be like Jesus’ dear friends from Bethany, that we might serve Him faithfully like Martha, learn from Him earnestly like Mary, and ultimately be raised by Him like Lazarus. Through their Lord and ours, Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1067) Mary, Martha, and Lazarus of Bethany Mary, Martha, and Lazarus of Bethany were disciples with whom Jesus had a special bond of love and friendship. John’s Gospel records that “Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus” (John 11:5). On one occasion, Martha welcomed Jesus into their home for a meal. While Martha did all the work, Mary sat at Jesus’ feet, listening to His Word, and was commended by Jesus for choosing the “good portion, which will not be taken away from her” (Luke 10:38–42). When their brother Lazarus died, Jesus spoke to Martha this beautiful Gospel promise: “I am the resurrection and the life. Whoever believes in Me, though he die, yet shall he live” (John 11:25). Ironically, when Jesus raised Lazarus from the dead, the Jews became more determined than ever to kill Jesus (John 11:39–54). Six days before Jesus was crucified, Mary anointed His feet with a very expensive fragrant oil and wiped them with her hair, not knowing at the time that she was doing it in preparation for Jesus’ burial (John 12:1–8; Matthew 26:6– 13).

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession IV (II) 107–114

[107] Truly, it is amazing that the adversaries are in no way moved by so many passages of Scripture, which clearly credit justification to faith. Indeed, Scripture denies this ability to works.

[108] Do they think that the same point is repeated so often for no purpose? Do they think that these words fell thoughtlessly from the Holy Spirit?

[109] But they have also come up with sophisticated tricks by which they escape these passages. They say that these passages of Scripture (that speak of faith) ought to be received as referring to faith that has been formed (fides formata). This means they do not credit justification to faith except on account of love. Yes, they do not credit justification to faith in any way, but only to love, because they dream that faith can coexist with mortal sin.

[110] Where does this go? They again abolish the promise and return to the Law. If faith receives forgiveness of sins because of love, forgiveness of sins will always be uncertain, because we never love as much as we ought to. Indeed, we do not love unless our hearts are firmly convinced that forgiveness of sins has been granted to us. So the adversaries, in forgiveness of sins and justification, require confidence in one’s own love. In this way, they completely abolish the Gospel about the free forgiveness of sins; although, at the same time, they do not offer this love or understand it, unless they believe that forgiveness of sins is freely received.

[111] We also say that love ought to follow faith, as Paul also says in Galatians 5:6: “For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything, but only faith working through love.”

[112] Yet, we must not think that by confidence in this love, or because of this love, we receive forgiveness of sins and reconciliation, just as we do not receive forgiveness of sins because of other works that follow. But forgiveness of sins is received by faith alone. Indeed, this is properly called faith because the promise cannot be received except by faith.

[113] Faith, properly called, is what believes this promise. Scripture speaks of this faith.

[114] Because faith receives forgiveness of sins and reconciles us to God, we are ‹like Abraham› counted as righteous for Christ’s sake before we love and before we do the works of the Law, although love necessarily follows.
