# July 20

## Psalmody

57The LORD is my | portion;* I promise to | keep your words. 58I entreat your favor with | all my heart;* be gracious to me according to your | promise. 59When I think | on my ways,* I turn my feet to your testi- | monies; 60I hasten and do | not delay* to keep your com- | mandments. 61Though the cords of the wicked en- | snare me,* I do not for- | get your law. 62At midnight I rise to | praise you,* because of your just and righ- | teous decrees. 63I am a companion of all who | fear you,* of those who keep your | precepts. 64The earth, O LORD, is full of your | steadfast love;* teach me your | statutes!—Psalm 119:57–64
Additional Psalm: Psalm 115:9–18

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 3:1–21

The LORD Calls Samuel

1Now the young man Samuel was ministering to the LORD under Eli. And the word of the LORD was rare in those days; there was no frequent vision. 2At that time Eli, whose eyesight had begun to grow dim so that he could not see, was lying down in his own place. 3The lamp of God had not yet gone out, and Samuel was lying down in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was. 4Then the LORD called Samuel, and he said, “Here I am!” 5and ran to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said, “I did not call; lie down again.” So he went and lay down. 6And the LORD called again, “Samuel!” and Samuel arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said, “I did not call, my son; lie down again.” 7Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, and the word of the LORD had not yet been revealed to him. 8And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” Then Eli perceived that the LORD was calling the young man. 9Therefore Eli said to Samuel, “Go, lie down, and if he calls you, you shall say, ‘Speak, LORD, for your servant hears.’” So Samuel went and lay down in his place. 10And the LORD came and stood, calling as at other times, “Samuel! Samuel!” And Samuel said, “Speak, for your servant hears.” 11Then the LORD said to Samuel, “Behold, I am about to do a thing in Israel at which the two ears of everyone who hears it will tingle. 12On that day I will fulfill against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his house, from beginning to end. 13And I declare to him that I am about to punish his house forever, for the iniquity that he knew, because his sons were blaspheming God, and he did not restrain them. 14Therefore I swear to the house of Eli that the iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be atoned for by sacrifice or offering forever.” 15Samuel lay until morning; then he opened the doors of the house of the LORD. And Samuel was afraid to tell the vision to Eli. 16But Eli called Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son.” And he said, “Here I am.” 17And Eli said, “What was it that he told you? Do not hide it from me. May God do so to you and more also if you hide anything from me of all that he told you.” 18So Samuel told him everything and hid nothing from him. And he said, “It is the LORD. Let him do what seems good to him.” 19And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him and let none of his words fall to the ground. 20And all Israel from Dan to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established as a prophet of the LORD. 21And the LORD appeared again at Shiloh, for the LORD revealed himself to Samuel at Shiloh by the word of the LORD.

## New Testament Reading: Acts 16:1–22

Timothy Joins Paul and Silas

1Paul came also to Derbe and to Lystra. A disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek. 2He was well spoken of by the brothers at Lystra and Iconium. 3Paul wanted Timothy to accompany him, and he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places, for they all knew that his father was a Greek. 4As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered to them for observance the decisions that had been reached by the apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem. 5So the churches were strengthened in the faith, and they increased in numbers daily.

The Macedonian Call

6And they went through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia. 7And when they had come up to Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them. 8So, passing by Mysia, they went down to Troas. 9And a vision appeared to Paul in the night: a man of Macedonia was standing there, urging him and saying, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.” 10And when Paul had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go on into Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.

The Conversion of Lydia

11So, setting sail from Troas, we made a direct voyage to Samothrace, and the following day to Neapolis, 12and from there to Philippi, which is a leading city of the district of Macedonia and a Roman colony. We remained in this city some days. 13And on the Sabbath day we went outside the gate to the riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had come together. 14One who heard us was a woman named Lydia, from the city of Thyatira, a seller of purple goods, who was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what was said by Paul. 15And after she was baptized, and her household as well, she urged us, saying, “If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come to my house and stay.” And she prevailed upon us.

Paul and Silas in Prison

16As we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a slave girl who had a spirit of divination and brought her owners much gain by fortune-telling. 17She followed Paul and us, crying out, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to you the way of salvation.” 18And this she kept doing for many days. Paul, having become greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” And it came out that very hour. 19But when her owners saw that their hope of gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers. 20And when they had brought them to the magistrates, they said, “These men are Jews, and they are disturbing our city. 21They advocate customs that are not lawful for us as Romans to accept or practice.” 22The crowd joined in attacking them, and the magistrates tore the garments off them and gave orders to beat them with rods.

## Writing

In this way, too, the Holy Scriptures do not credit the human powers of the natural free will with conversion, faith in Christ, regeneration, renewal, and all that belongs to their effective beginning and end. They do not credit free will the whole way, half way, or in any way, even in the smallest or most trivial way. They credit conversion solely and completely to the Holy Spirit’s divine work, as also the Apology teaches. Reason and free will are able to live an outwardly decent life to a certain extent. But only the Holy Spirit causes a person to be born anew [John 3:5] and to have inwardly another heart, mind, and natural desire. He opens the mind and heart to understand the Scriptures and to listen to the Word, as it is written in Luke 24:45, “Then He opened their minds to understand the Scriptures.” One who heard us was a woman named Lydia, from the city of Thyatira, a seller of purple goods, who was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what was said by Paul. (Acts 16:14) For it is God who works in you, both to will and to work for His good pleasure. (Philippians 2:13) God exalted Him at His right hand as Leader and Savior, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. (Acts 5:31) God may perhaps grant them repentance leading to a knowledge of the truth. (2 Timothy 2:25) For it has been granted to you that for the sake of Christ you should not only believe in Him but also suffer for His sake. (Philippians 1:29) For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God. (Ephesians 2:8) Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in Him whom He has sent.” (John 6:29)—Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord II 25–26

## Hymnody

Spirit of life, of love and peace, Unite our hearts, our joy increase, Thy
gracious help supply. To each of us the blessing give In Christian fellowship
to live, In joyful hope to die.—May We Thy Precepts, Lord, Fulfill (LSB
698:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, through the prophet Elijah, You continued the prophetic pattern of teaching Your people the true faith and demonstrating through miracles Your presence in creation to heal it of its brokenness. Grant that Your Church may see in Your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the final end-times prophet whose teaching and miracles continue in Your Church through the healing medicine of the Gospel and the Sacraments; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1061) Elijah The prophet Elijah, whose name means “My God is Yahweh [the LORD],” prophesied in the Northern Kingdom of Israel primarily during the reign of Ahab (874–853 BC). Ahab, under the influence of his pagan wife Jezebel, had encouraged the worship of Baal throughout his kingdom, even as Jezebel sought to get rid of the worship of Yahweh. Elijah was called by God to denounce this idolatry and to call the people of Israel back to the worship of Yahweh as the only true God (as he did in 1 Kings 18:20–40). Elijah was a rugged and imposing figure, living in the wilderness and dressing in a garment of camel’s hair and a leather belt (2 Kings 1:8). He was a prophet mighty in word and deed. Many miracles were done through Elijah, including the raising of the dead (1 Kings 17:17–24) and the effecting of a long drought in Israel (1 Kings 17:1). At the end of his ministry, he was taken up into heaven while Elisha, his successor, looked on (2 Kings 2:11). Later, the prophet Malachi proclaimed that Elijah would return before the coming of the Messiah (Malachi 4:5–6), a prophecy that was fulfilled in the prophetic ministry of John the Baptist (Matthew 11:14).

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession IV (II) 12–21

[12] In this opinion there are many great and deadly errors, which would be too boring to list. Let the careful reader think only about this: If this is Christian righteousness, what difference is there between philosophy and Christ’s teaching? If we merit forgiveness of sins by these acts, of what benefit is Christ? If we can be justified by reason and the works of reason, what need is there of Christ or regeneration [1 Peter 1:18–21]?

[13] From these opinions the matter has now reached the point that many ridicule us because we teach that a righteousness different from philosophic righteousness must be sought.

[14] We have heard that some preachers, after setting aside the Gospel, have explained Aristotle’s ethics instead of a sermon. Not that such men err if those things the adversaries defend are true. For Aristotle wrote about civil morals in such a learned way that nothing further about the topic needs to be demanded.

[15] We see books published in which certain sayings of Christ are compared with the sayings of Socrates, Zeno, and others. It’s as though Christ had come to deliver certain laws through which we might merit forgiveness of sins, as though we did not receive this freely because of His merits.

[16] Therefore, if we here accept the teaching of the adversaries—that by the works of reason we merit forgiveness of sins and justification—there will be no difference between righteousness of philosophers (or certainly of Pharisees) and of Christians.

[17] Yet the adversaries do not pass by Christ completely. They require a knowledge of the history about Christ. They credit Him by writing that from His merit a way of life is given to us or, as they say, “first grace” (prima gratia). They understand this as a habit, inclining us to love God more readily. Yet, what they credit to this habit is of little importance. For they imagine that the human will’s acts are the same before and after this habit. They imagine that the will can love God; but, nevertheless, this habit stimulates it to love more cheerfully. They tell us, “First, merit this habit by your earlier merits.” Then they tell us we should merit an increase of this habit and life eternal by the works of the Law.

[18] In this way they bury Christ, so that people may not benefit from Him as a Mediator and believe that they freely receive forgiveness of sins and reconciliation for His sake. They let people dream that by their own fulfillment of the Law, they merit forgiveness of sins, that by their own fulfillment of the Law, they are counted righteous before God. However, the Law is never satisfied since reason does nothing except certain civil works. In the meantime, a person neither fears God nor truly believes that God cares. Although they speak about this habit, God’s love cannot exist in a person without the righteousness of faith, nor can His love be understood.

[19] They make up a distinction between due merit and true, complete merit (meritum congrui and meritum condigni). This is only a tactic, so that they do not appear to agree openly with the Pelagians. If God must give grace for the due merit, it is no longer due merit, but a true duty and complete merit. They do not know what they are saying. After this habit of love is in a person, they imagine that such a person can gain merit in a wholly deserving way (de condigno). Yet they tell us to doubt whether there is a habit present. Therefore, how do they know whether they gain merit in a merely agreeable way or a wholly deserving way (de congruo or de condigno)?

[20] This whole matter was made up by idle men. They did not know how forgiveness of sins happens and how, by God’s judgment and the terrors of conscience, trust in works is driven out of us. Secure hypocrites always judge that they gain merit in a wholly deserving way, whether the habit is present or is not present, because people naturally trust in their own righteousness. But terrified consciences waver and hesitate. Then they seek and heap up other works in order to find peace. Such consciences never think that they gain merit in a wholly deserving way, and they rush into despair unless they hear—in addition to the teaching of the Law—the Gospel about free forgiveness of sins and righteousness of faith.

[21] So the adversaries teach nothing but righteousness of reason, or certainly about the Law. They see the Law just like the Jewish people see Moses’ veiled face. In self-secure hypocrites, who think that they fulfill the Law, they stir up assumptions and empty confidence in works and cause them to have contempt for the grace of Christ. On the other hand, they also drive timid consciences to despair. The timid labor with doubt. They can never experience what faith is and how effective it is. So at last they completely despair.
