# July 25

## Psalmody

1O God, you are my God; earnestly I | seek you;* my soul thirsts for you; my flesh faints for you, as in a dry and weary land where there is no | water. 2So I have looked upon you in the sanctu- | ary,* beholding your power and | glory. 3Because your steadfast love is bet- | ter than life,* my lips will | praise you. 4So I will bless you as long | as I live;* in your name I will lift | up my hands. 5My soul will be satisfied as with fat and | rich food,* and my mouth will praise you with | joyful lips, 6when I remember you up- | on my bed,* and meditate on you in the watches | of the night; 7for you have | been my help,* and in the shadow of your wings I will | sing for joy. 8My soul | clings to you;* your right hand up- | holds me.—Psalm 63:1–8
Additional Psalm: Psalm 149

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 9:1–27

Saul Chosen to Be King

1There was a man of Benjamin whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, son of Zeror, son of Becorath, son of Aphiah, a Benjaminite, a man of wealth. 2And he had a son whose name was Saul, a handsome young man. There was not a man among the people of Israel more handsome than he. From his shoulders upward he was taller than any of the people. 3Now the donkeys of Kish, Saul’s father, were lost. So Kish said to Saul his son, “Take one of the young men with you, and arise, go and look for the donkeys.” 4And he passed through the hill country of Ephraim and passed through the land of Shalishah, but they did not find them. And they passed through the land of Shaalim, but they were not there. Then they passed through the land of Benjamin, but did not find them. 5When they came to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant who was with him, “Come, let us go back, lest my father cease to care about the donkeys and become anxious about us.” 6But he said to him, “Behold, there is a man of God in this city, and he is a man who is held in honor; all that he says comes true. So now let us go there. Perhaps he can tell us the way we should go.” 7Then Saul said to his servant, “But if we go, what can we bring the man? For the bread in our sacks is gone, and there is no present to bring to the man of God. What do we have?” 8The servant answered Saul again, “Here, I have with me a quarter of a shekel of silver, and I will give it to the man of God to tell us our way.” 9(Formerly in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God, he said, “Come, let us go to the seer,” for today’s “prophet” was formerly called a seer.) 10And Saul said to his servant, “Well said; come, let us go.” So they went to the city where the man of God was. 11As they went up the hill to the city, they met young women coming out to draw water and said to them, “Is the seer here?” 12They answered, “He is; behold, he is just ahead of you. Hurry. He has come just now to the city, because the people have a sacrifice today on the high place. 13As soon as you enter the city you will find him, before he goes up to the high place to eat. For the people will not eat till he comes, since he must bless the sacrifice; afterward those who are invited will eat. Now go up, for you will meet him immediately.” 14So they went up to the city. As they were entering the city, they saw Samuel coming out toward them on his way up to the high place. 15Now the day before Saul came, the LORD had revealed to Samuel: 16“Tomorrow about this time I will send to you a man from the land of Benjamin, and you shall anoint him to be prince over my people Israel. He shall save my people from the hand of the Philistines. For I have seen my people, because their cry has come to me.” 17When Samuel saw Saul, the LORD told him, “Here is the man of whom I spoke to you! He it is who shall restrain my people.” 18Then Saul approached Samuel in the gate and said, “Tell me where is the house of the seer?” 19Samuel answered Saul, “I am the seer. Go up before me to the high place, for today you shall eat with me, and in the morning I will let you go and will tell you all that is on your mind. 20As for your donkeys that were lost three days ago, do not set your mind on them, for they have been found. And for whom is all that is desirable in Israel? Is it not for you and for all your father’s house?” 21Saul answered, “Am I not a Benjaminite, from the least of the tribes of Israel? And is not my clan the humblest of all the clans of the tribe of Benjamin?

Why then have you spoken to me in this way?”

22Then Samuel took Saul and his young man and brought them into the hall and gave them a place at the head of those who had been invited, who were about thirty persons. 23And Samuel said to the cook, “Bring the portion I gave you, of which I said to you, ‘Put it aside.’” 24So the cook took up the leg and what was on it and set them before Saul. And Samuel said, “See, what was kept is set before you. Eat, because it was kept for you until the hour appointed, that you might eat with the guests.” So Saul ate with Samuel that day. 25And when they came down from the high place into the city, a bed was spread for Saul on the roof, and he lay down to sleep. 26Then at the break of dawn Samuel called to Saul on the roof, “Up, that I may send you on your way.” So Saul arose, and both he and Samuel went out into the street. 27As they were going down to the outskirts of the city, Samuel said to Saul, “Tell the servant to pass on before us, and when he has passed on, stop here yourself for a while, that I may make known to you the word of God.”

## New Testament Reading: Acts 21:37–22:16

Paul Speaks to the People

37As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he said to the tribune, “May I say something to you?” And he said, “Do you know Greek? 38Are you not the Egyptian, then, who recently stirred up a revolt and led the four thousand men of the Assassins out into the wilderness?” 39Paul replied, “I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no obscure city. I beg you, permit me to speak to the people.” 40And when he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the steps, motioned with his hand to the people. And when there was a great hush, he addressed them in the Hebrew language, saying: 22:1“Brothers and fathers, hear the defense that I now make before you.” 2And when they heard that he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they became even more quiet. And he said: 3“I am a Jew, born in Tarsus in Cilicia, but brought up in this city, educated at the feet of Gamaliel according to the strict manner of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God as all of you are this day. 4I persecuted this Way to the death, binding and delivering to prison both men and women, 5as the high priest and the whole council of elders can bear me witness. From them I received letters to the brothers, and I journeyed toward Damascus to take those also who were there and bring them in bonds to Jerusalem to be punished. 6“As I was on my way and drew near to Damascus, about noon a great light from heaven suddenly shone around me. 7And I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’ 8And I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me, ‘I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are persecuting.’ 9Now those who were with me saw the light but did not understand the voice of the one who was speaking to me. 10And I said, ‘What shall I do, Lord?’ And the Lord said to me, ‘Rise, and go into Damascus, and there you will be told all that is appointed for you to do.’ 11And since I could not see because of the brightness of that light, I was led by the hand by those who were with me, and came into Damascus. 12“And one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well spoken of by all the Jews who lived there, 13came to me, and standing by me said to me, ‘Brother Saul, receive your sight.’ And at that very hour I received my sight and saw him. 14And he said, ‘The God of our fathers appointed you to know his will, to see the Righteous One and to hear a voice from his mouth; 15for you will be a witness for him to everyone of what you have seen and heard. 16And now why do you wait? Rise and be baptized and wash away your sins, calling on his name.’”

## Writing

“We hold that a man is justified by faith apart from works of the law,” St. Paul con-cludes a lengthy argumentation in which he declared that all men without exception are sinners and cannot stand before God. But by God’s grace this is changed when God forgives their sins and declares them righteous, because of Christ’s reconciliation. Men can do nothing, all is due to God’s grace. In the Gospel God offers forgiveness and perfect righteousness to sinners, and whoever believes His Word and accepts His grace thereby has forgiveness and righteousness… Love calls forth love. God loved us and gave His Son to be our Savior, and if we know and realize this we shall love Him in return and show our love in works. This was also true of the man out of whom our Lord had driven the demons in the country of the Gerasenes. “The man from whom the demons had gone begged that he might be with Him” (Luke 8:38). The grace he had experienced impelled him to give evidence of this gratitude. He proclaimed throughout the whole city how much Jesus had done for him. This is always the result when pardoned sinners realize and believe that the Lord has saved them in body and soul, has redeemed them from their sins… This then is the relation of works and justification. Works contribute nothing toward earning or meriting justification but are the natural and necessary fruit. Whoever does not love the Lord Jesus, whoever is not impelled to show his love, whoever does not thank and serve Him, evidently does not believe in the grace we have in Him. He is still in his sins and not justified. St. James writes that whoever brings back a sinner from the error of his way, that is, helps him to believe that his sins are covered and forgiven will save his soul from death (James 5:20). The pardoned has been brought from death to life. This new life must prove itself in works of love.—C. C. Schmidt

## Hymnody

O Lord, for James we praise You, Who fell to Herod’s sword; He drank the
cup of suff’ring And thus fulfilled Your word. Lord, curb our vain
impatience For glory and for fame, Equip us for such suff’rings As glorify
Your name.—By All Your Saints in Warfare (LSB 518:21)

## Prayer of the Day

O gracious God, Your servant and apostle James was the first among the Twelve to suffer martyrdom for the name of Jesus Christ. Pour out upon the leaders of Your Church that spirit of self-denying service that they may forsake all false and passing allurements and follow Christ alone, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F23) St. James the Elder, Apostle St. James and his brother John, sons of Zebedee and Salome (see Matthew 27:56 and Mark 15:40), were fishermen in the Sea of Galilee who were called with Peter and his brother Andrew to follow Jesus (Matthew 4:18–22). In the Gospel lists of Jesus’ disciples, James is listed following Peter and preceding John. Together, these three appear as leaders of the Twelve. Because James precedes John, it is reasoned that James is the elder of the brothers. The Book of Acts records that James was beheaded by Herod Agrippa I, probably between AD 42 and 44 (Acts 12:1–2). Thus James is the first of the Twelve to die a martyr.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession IV (II) 75–85

[75] We think even the adversaries acknowledge that the forgiveness of sins is necessary first in justification. We are all under sin. Therefore, we reason as follows:

[76] To receive the forgiveness of sins is to be justified, according to Psalm 32:1, “Blessed is the one whose transgression is forgiven.”

[77] By faith alone in Christ—not through love, not because of love or works—we receive the forgiveness of sins, although love follows faith.

[78] Therefore, by faith alone we are justified. We understand justification as the making of a righteous person out of an unrighteous one, or that a person is regenerated.

[79] It will become easy to state the minor premise ‹that we receive forgiveness of sin by faith, not by love› if we know how forgiveness of sins happens. With great indifference the adversaries dispute whether forgiveness of sins and infusion of grace are the same change. Being useless men, they did not know how to answer this question. In the forgiveness of sins, the terrors of sin and of eternal death must be overcome in the heart. Paul testifies about this in 1 Corinthians 15:56–57, “The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.” In other words, sin terrifies consciences. This happens through the Law, which shows God’s wrath against sin. But we gain the victory through Christ. How? Through faith, when we comfort ourselves by confidence in the mercy promised for Christ’s sake.

[80] Therefore, we prove the minor premise. God’s wrath cannot be appeased if we set our own works against it. For Christ has been set forth as an Atoning Sacrifice so, that for His sake, the Father may be reconciled to us. But Christ is not received as a Mediator except by faith. Therefore, by faith alone we receive forgiveness of sins when we comfort our hearts with confidence in the mercy promised for Christ’s sake. Likewise, Paul says in Romans 5:2, “Through Him we have also obtained access” and adds, “by faith.” Therefore, we are reconciled to the Father and receive forgiveness of sins when we are comforted with confidence in the mercy promised for Christ’s sake.

[81] The adversaries regard Christ as Mediator and Atoning Sacrifice for this reason: He has merited the habit of love. They do not encourage us to use Him now as Mediator. They act as though Christ were certainly in the grave. They imagine that we have access to God through our own works. They think they merit this habit through these, and afterward, by this love, come to God. Is this not to bury Christ altogether and to take away the entire teaching of faith? Paul, on the contrary, teaches that we have access to God (that is, reconciliation) through Christ. To show how this happens, he adds that we have access by faith. By faith, for Christ’s sake, we receive forgiveness of sins. We cannot set up our own love and our own works against God’s wrath.

[82] Second. It is certain that sins are forgiven for the sake of Christ as our Atoning Sacrifice, “whom God put forward as a propitiation” (Romans 3:25). Furthermore, Paul adds, “by faith.” Therefore, this atonement benefits us in this way: We receive the mercy promised in Him by faith and set it against God’s wrath and judgment. To the same effect, it is written in Hebrews 4:14, 16, “Since then we have a great high priest . . . let us then with confidence draw near.” The apostle tells us to come to God, not with confidence in our own merits, but with confidence in Christ as the High Priest. The apostle requires faith.

[83] Third. Peter says in Acts 10:43, “To Him all the prophets bear witness that everyone who believes in Him receives forgiveness of sins through His name.” How could this be said more clearly? Peter says we receive forgiveness of sins through Christ’s name, that is, for His sake. It is not for the sake of our merits, not for the sake of our contrition, attrition, love, worship, or works. He adds: When we believe in Him. Peter requires faith. For we cannot receive Christ’s name except by faith. Besides, he refers to the agreement of all the prophets. This is truly to cite the authority of the Church. We will speak again later on this topic, when describing “repentance.”

[84] Fourth. Forgiveness of sins is something promised for Christ’s sake. It cannot be received except through faith alone. For a promise cannot be received except by faith alone. Romans 4:16 says, “That is why it depends on faith, in order that the promise may rest on grace and be guaranteed.” It is as though he says, “If the matter were to depend on our merits, the promise would be uncertain and useless. For we never could determine when we would have enough merit.” Experienced consciences can easily understand this. So Paul says in Galatians 3:22, “But the Scripture imprisoned everything under sin, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.” He takes merit away from us because he says that all are guilty and included under sin. Then he adds that the promise (namely, forgiveness of sins and justification) is given, and he shows how the promise can be received—by faith. This reasoning, derived from the nature of a promise, is the chief reasoning in Paul and is often repeated. Nor can anything be devised or imagined by which Paul’s argument can be overthrown.

[85] Therefore, let not good minds allow themselves to be forced from the conviction that we receive forgiveness of sins for Christ’s sake, through faith alone. In this they have sure and firm consolation against the terrors of sin, against eternal death, and against all the gates of hell.
