# July 22

## Psalmody

1By the waters of Babylon, there we sat | down and wept,* when we remembered | Zion. 2On the | willows there* we hung | up our lyres. 3For there our captors required of us songs, and our tormentors, mirth, | saying,* “Sing us one of the songs of | Zion!” 4How shall we sing the | LORD’s song* in a | foreign land? 5If I forget you, O Je- | rusalem,* let my right hand for- | get its skill! 6Let my tongue stick to the roof of my mouth, if I do not re- | member you,* if I do not set Jerusalem above my | highest joy! 7Remember, O LORD, against the Edomites the day of Je- | rusalem,* how they said, “Lay it bare, lay it bare, down to its foun- | dations!”—Psalm 137:1–7
Additional Psalm: Psalm 56

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 5:1–6:3, 10–16

The Philistines and the Ark

1When the Philistines captured the ark of God, they brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod. 2Then the Philistines took the ark of God and brought it into the house of Dagon and set it up beside Dagon. 3And when the people of Ashdod rose early the next day, behold, Dagon had fallen face downward on the ground before the ark of the LORD. So they took Dagon and put him back in his place. 4But when they rose early on the next morning, behold, Dagon had fallen face downward on the ground before the ark of the LORD, and the head of Dagon and both his hands were lying cut off on the threshold. Only the trunk of Dagon was left to him. 5This is why the priests of Dagon and all who enter the house of Dagon do not tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod to this day. 6The hand of the LORD was heavy against the people of Ashdod, and he terrified and afflicted them with tumors, both Ashdod and its territory. 7And when the men of Ashdod saw how things were, they said, “The ark of the God of Israel must not remain with us, for his hand is hard against us and against Dagon our god.” 8So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines and said, “What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel?” They answered, “Let the ark of the God of Israel be brought around to Gath.” So they brought the ark of the God of Israel there. 9But after they had brought it around, the hand of the LORD was against the city, causing a very great panic, and he afflicted the men of the city, both young and old, so that tumors broke out on them. 10So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. But as soon as the ark of God came to Ekron, the people of Ekron cried out, “They have brought around to us the ark of the God of Israel to kill us and our people.” 11They sent therefore and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines and said, “Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it return to its own place, that it may not kill us and our people.” For there was a deathly panic throughout the whole city. The hand of God was very heavy there. 12The men who did not die were struck with tumors, and the cry of the city went up to heaven.

The Ark Returned to Israel

6:1The ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines seven months. 2And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners and said, “What shall we do with the ark of the LORD? Tell us with what we shall send it to its place.” 3They said, “If you send away the ark of the God of Israel, do not send it empty, but by all means return him a guilt offering. Then you will be healed, and it will be known to you why his hand does not turn away from you.”… 10The men did so, and took two milk cows and yoked them to the cart and shut up their calves at home. 11And they put the ark of the LORD on the cart and the box with the golden mice and the images of their tumors. 12And the cows went straight in the direction of Beth-shemesh along one highway, lowing as they went. They turned neither to the right nor to the left, and the lords of the Philistines went after them as far as the border of Beth-shemesh. 13Now the people of Beth-shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley. And when they lifted up their eyes and saw the ark, they rejoiced to see it. 14The cart came into the field of Joshua of Beth- shemesh and stopped there. A great stone was there. And they split up the wood of the cart and offered the cows as a burnt offering to the LORD. 15And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD and the box that was beside it, in which were the golden figures, and set them upon the great stone. And the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices on that day to the LORD. 16And when the five lords of the Philistines saw it, they returned that day to Ekron.

## New Testament Reading: Acts 18:1–11, 23–28

Paul in Corinth

1After this Paul left Athens and went to Corinth. 2And he found a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to leave Rome. And he went to see them, 3and because he was of the same trade he stayed with them and work-ed, for they were tentmakers by trade. 4And he reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath, and tried to persuade Jews and Greeks. 5When Silas and Timothy arrived from Macedonia, Paul was occupied with the word, testifying to the Jews that the Christ was Jesus. 6And when they opposed and reviled him, he shook out his garments and said to them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am innocent. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.” 7And he left there and went to the house of a man named Titius Justus, a worshiper of God. His house was next door to the synagogue. 8Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord, together with his entire household. And many of the Corinthians hearing Paul believed and were baptized. 9And the Lord said to Paul one night in a vision, “Do not be afraid, but go on speaking and do not be silent, 10for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many in this city who are my peo-ple.” 11And he stayed a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.…

[Paul Returns to Antioch]

23After spending some time there, he departed and went from one place to the next through the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.

Apollos Speaks Boldly in Ephesus

24Now a Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, came to Ephesus. He was an eloquent man, competent in the Scriptures. 25He had been instructed in the way of the Lord. And being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, though he knew only the baptism of John. 26He began to speak boldly in the synagogue, but when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him and explained to him the way of God more accurately. 27And when he wished to cross to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples to welcome him. When he arrived, he greatly helped those who through grace had believed, 28for he powerfully refuted the Jews in public, showing by the Scriptures that the Christ was Jesus.

## Writing

The ancient teachers of the Church are, for the most part, of the opinion that Mary Magdalene was this sinful woman of which Luke writes here [Luke 7:36–56]… We do not want to grow grey hairs over this debate, so we will go directly to the account that has been read…. How does Mary Magdalene’s repentant heart please the Lord Jesus? The host, Simon, is displeased with Mary and with Christ, but the Lord Jesus shows that there is joy in heaven over Mary’s conversion: “the sinner’s tears are the wine and delicacies of the angels.” You see, first, He turns to Mary, just as He turned to Peter in His Passion. This is a great honor. Second, He praises her tears, her kiss, and her anointing, and He lets it be clearly understood that with these “three courses,” Mary served a much more glorious meal than the host of the house himself. Of this, Christendom sings, “This is the feast that is pleasing to You, O wise Father.” From her tears, the Lord Jesus notices a humble heart, troubled by sins committed. From her kiss, He notices her faith and trust. From the anointing, He notices the intention of her heart, that from now on she will use everything that is precious to her for the glory of Christ. Moreover, He praises the thankfulness of her heart that she showed through many signs of love; He says, “Her many sins are forgiven, on account of which she has loved much.” (This is how Basil, Chrysostom, and Theophylact explain this passage.) You can see from her many agreeing signs of love that her kisses and anointing are her “Thanks be to God!” or her “tip”—not because they are worth so much, but because she has nothing more… It is not Christ’s intention to say that Mary merited the forgiveness of sins with her love … but rather He shows that through so many signs of love, Mary revealed her thankful heart, thankful that the Lord Jesus had graciously forgiven her so many sins. And this pleases Him very well.—Valerius Herberger

## Hymnody

Make them apostles, heralds of Your cross; Forth let them go to tell the
world of grace. Inspired by You, may they count all but loss And stand at
last with joy before Your face.—God of the Prophets, Bless the Prophets’
Sons (LSB 682:5)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, Your Son, Jesus Christ, restored Mary Magdalene to health and called her to be the first witness of His resurrection. Heal us from all our infirmities, and call us to know You in the power of Your Son’s unending life; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F22) St. Mary Magdalene Whenever the New Testament Gospels name the women who were with Jesus, St. Mary Magdalene is listed first (John 19:25 is the only exception), perhaps because she was the first to see the risen Savior alive. Luke 8:2 reports that Jesus had cured her of being possessed by seven demons. Through the centuries, she has often been identified with the repentant “woman of the city” who anointed Jesus’ feet as He sat at the table in the Pharisee’s home (Luke 7:36–50). But there is no biblical basis for this identification of her with a penitent prostitute. Nor is she to be identified with Mary, the sister of Martha, in Bethany. According to the Gospels, Mary Magdalene saw Jesus die; she witnessed His burial; and, most important, she was the first to see Him alive again after His resurrection (John 20:11– 18). It is for good reason that Bernard of Clairvaux calls her “the apostle to the apostles.”

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession IV (II) 36–47

[36] Lastly, it was very foolish for the adversaries to write that people who are under eternal wrath merit forgiveness of sins by an act of love, which springs from their mind. For it is impossible to love God unless forgiveness of sins is received first by faith. The heart, truly feeling that God is angry, cannot love God unless He is shown to have been reconciled. As long as He terrifies us and seems to cast us into eternal death, human nature is not able to take courage. It cannot love a wrathful, judging, and punishing God.

[37] It is easy for idle men to invent such dreams about love, such as a person guilty of mortal sin can love God above all things, because they do not feel what God’s wrath or judgment is. But in agony of conscience and in conflicts ‹with Satan›, conscience experiences the emptiness of these philosophical speculations.

[38] Paul says in Romans 4:15, “The law brings wrath.” He does not say that by the Law people merit forgiveness of sins. For the Law always accuses and terrifies consciences. Therefore, it does not justify, because a conscience terrified by the Law runs from God’s judgment. They err who assume that by the Law—by their own works—they merit forgiveness of sins.

[39] It is enough for us to have said these things about the righteousness of reason or of the Law, which the adversaries teach. Later, when we will declare our belief about the righteousness of faith, the subject itself will drive us to present more testimonies. These also will be of service in overthrowing the adversaries’ errors that we have reviewed so far.

[40] By their own strength, people cannot fulfill God’s Law. They are all under sin, subject to eternal wrath and death. Because of this, we cannot be freed by the Law from sin and be justified. But the promise of forgiveness of sins and of justification has been given us for Christ’s sake, who was given for us in order that He might make satisfaction for the sins of the world. He has been appointed as the Mediator and Atoning Sacrifice.

[41] This promise does not depend on our merits, but freely offers forgiveness of sins and justification, as Paul says in Romans 11:6, “But if it is by grace, it is no longer on the basis of works; otherwise grace would no longer be grace.” And in another place, Romans 3:21, “The righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law.” In other words, forgiveness of sins is freely offered. Nor does reconciliation depend on our merits.

[42] Because if forgiveness of sins were to depend on our merits, and reconciliation were from the Law, it would be useless. Since we do not fulfill the Law, it would also follow that we would never gain the promise of reconciliation. Paul reasons this way in Romans 4:14, “For if it is the adherents of the law who are to be the heirs, faith is null and the promise is void.” If the promise would depend on our merits and the Law, which we never fulfill, it would follow that the promise would be useless.

[43] Since justification is gained through the free promise, it follows that we cannot justify ourselves. Otherwise, why would there be a need to promise? Since the promise can only be received by faith, the Gospel (which is properly the promise of forgiveness of sins and of justification for Christ’s sake) proclaims the righteousness of faith in Christ. The Law does not teach this, nor is this the righteousness of the Law.

[44] For the Law demands our works and our perfection. But, for Christ’s sake, the Gospel freely offers reconciliation to us, who have been vanquished by sin and death. This is received not by works, but by faith alone. This faith does not bring to God confidence in one’s own merits, but only confidence in the promise, or the mercy promised in Christ.

[45] This special faith (by which an individual believes that for Christ’s sake his sins are forgiven him, and that for Christ’s sake God is reconciled and sees us favorably) gains forgiveness of sins and justifies us. In repentance, namely, in terrors, this faith comforts and encourages hearts. It regenerates us and brings the Holy Spirit so that we may be able to fulfill God’s Law: to love God, truly fear God, truly be confident that God hears prayer, and obey God in all afflictions. This faith puts to death concupiscence and the like.

[46] So faith freely receives forgiveness of sins. It sets Christ, the Mediator and Atoning Sacrifice, against God’s wrath. It does not present our merits or our love. This faith is the true knowledge of Christ and helps itself to the benefits of Christ. This faith regenerates hearts and comes before the fulfilling of the Law.

[47] Not a syllable exists about this faith in the teaching of our adversaries. Therefore, we find equal fault with the adversaries because (a) they teach only the righteousness of the Law, and (b) they do not teach the righteousness of the Gospel, which proclaims the righteousness of faith in Christ.
