# August 6

## Psalmody

1It is good to give thanks | to the LORD,* to sing praises to your name, | O Most High; 2to declare your steadfast love in the | morning,* and your faithful- | ness by night, 3to the music of the lute | and the harp,* to the melody | of the lyre. 4For you, O LORD, have made me glad | by your work;* at the works of your hands I | sing for joy. 5How great are your works, | O LORD!* Your thoughts are | very deep! 6The stupid man cannot know; the fool cannot under- | stand this:* 7that though the wicked sprout like grass and all evildoers flourish, they are doomed to destruction for- | ever; 8but you, | O LORD,* are on high for- | ever. 9For behold, your enemies, O LORD, for behold, your enemies shall | perish;* all evildoers shall be | scattered.—Psalm 92:1–9
Additional Psalm: Psalm 92

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 20:1–23

Jonathan Warns David

1Then David fled from Naioth in Ramah and came and said before Jonathan, “What have I done? What is my guilt? And what is my sin before your father, that he seeks my life?” 2And he said to him, “Far from it! You shall not die. Behold, my father does nothing either great or small without disclosing it to me. And why should my father hide this from me? It is not so.” 3But David vowed again, saying, “Your father knows well that I have found favor in your eyes, and he thinks, ‘Do not let Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved.’ But truly, as the Lord lives and as your soul lives, there is but a step between me and death.” 4Then Jonathan said to David, “Whatever you say, I will do for you.” 5David said to Jonathan, “Behold, tomorrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit at table with the king. But let me go, that I may hide myself in the field till the third day at evening. 6If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David earnestly asked leave of me to run to Bethlehem his city, for there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the clan.’ 7If he says, ‘Good!’ it will be well with your servant, but if he is angry, then know that harm is determined by him. 8Therefore deal kindly with your servant, for you have brought your servant into a covenant of the LORD with you. But if there is guilt in me, kill me yourself, for why should you bring me to your father?” 9And Jonathan said, “Far be it from you! If I knew that it was determined by my father that harm should come to you, would I not tell you?” 10Then David said to Jonathan, “Who will tell me if your father answers you roughly?” 11And Jonathan said to David, “Come, let us go out into the field.” So they both went out into the field. 12And Jonathan said to David, “The LORD, the God of Israel, be witness! When I have sounded out my father, about this time tomorrow, or the third day, behold, if he is well disposed toward David, shall I not then send and disclose it to you? 13But should it please my father to do you harm, the LORD do so to Jonathan and more also if I do not disclose it to you and send you away, that you may go in safety. May the LORD be with you, as he has been with my father. 14If I am still alive, show me the steadfast love of the LORD, that I may not die; 15and do not cut off your steadfast love from my house forever, when the LORD cuts off every one of the enemies of David from the face of the earth.” 16And Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, “May the LORD take vengeance on David’s enemies.” 17And Jonathan made David swear again by his love for him, for he loved him as he loved his own soul. 18Then Jonathan said to him, “Tomorrow is the new moon, and you will be missed, because your seat will be empty. 19On the third day go down quickly to the place where you hid yourself when the matter was in hand, and remain beside the stone heap. 20And I will shoot three arrows to the side of it, as though I shot at a mark. 21And behold, I will send the young man, saying, ‘Go, find the arrows.’ If I say to the young man, ‘Look, the arrows are on this side of you, take them,’ then you are to come, for, as the LORD lives, it is safe for you and there is no danger. 22But if I say to the youth, ‘Look, the arrows are beyond you,’ then go, for the LORD has sent you away. 23And as for the matter of which you and I have spoken, behold, the LORD is between you and me forever.”

## New Testament Reading: Acts 28:16–31

16And when we came into Rome, Paul was allowed to stay by himself, with the soldier that guarded him.

Paul in Rome

17After three days he called together the local leaders of the Jews, and when they had gathered, he said to them, “Brothers, though I had done nothing against our people or the customs of our fathers, yet I was delivered as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. 18When they had examined me, they wished to set me at liberty, because there was no reason for the death penalty in my case. 19But because the Jews objected, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar—though I had no charge to bring against my nation. 20For this reason, therefore, I have asked to see you and speak with you, since it is because of the hope of Israel that I am wearing this chain.” 21And they said to him, “We have received no letters from Judea about you, and none of the brothers coming here has reported or spoken any evil about you. 22But we desire to hear from you what your views are, for with regard to this sect we know that everywhere it is spoken against.” 23When they had appointed a day for him, they came to him at his lodging in greater numbers. From morning till evening he expounded to them, testifying to the kingdom of God and trying to convince them about Jesus both from the Law of Moses and from the Prophets. 24And some were convinced by what he said, but others disbelieved. 25And disagreeing among themselves, they departed after Paul had made one statement: “The Holy Spirit was right in saying to your fathers through Isaiah the prophet: 26“‘Go to this people, and say, You will indeed hear but never understand, and you will indeed see but never perceive. 27For this people’s heart has grown dull, and with their ears they can barely hear, and their eyes they have closed; lest they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn, and I would heal them.’ 28Therefore let it be known to you that this salvation of God has been sent to the Gentiles; they will listen.” 30He lived there two whole years at his own expense, and welcomed all who came to him, 31proclaiming the kingdom of God and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness and without hindrance.

## Writing

Christ, in the last chapter of Luke, commands “that repentance and forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in His name” (24:47). The Gospel convicts all people that they are under sin, that they are subject to eternal wrath and death. It offers, for Christ’s sake, forgiveness of sin and justification, which is received through faith. The preaching of repentance (which accuses us) terrifies consciences with true and grave terrors. In these matters, hearts ought to receive consolation again. This happens if they believe Christ’s promise, that for His sake we have forgiveness of sins. This faith, encouraging and consoling in these fears, receives forgiveness of sins, justifies, and gives life. For this consolation is a new ‹birth› and spiritual life.… We speak of the kind of faith that is not an idle thought, but that liberates from death and produces a new life in hearts. This is the work of the Holy Spirit. This does not coexist with mortal sin. As long as faith is present, it produces good fruits, as we will explain later. About the conversion of the wicked, or about the way of regeneration, what can be said that is simpler and clearer? … [Regeneration] is received through the Word. [The Scholastics] teach just like the Anabaptists teach at this time. But God cannot be interacted with, God cannot be grasped, except through the Word. So justification happens through the Word, just as Paul says in Romans 1:16, “[The Gospel] is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes.” Likewise, he says in 10:17, “Faith comes from hearing.” Proof can be derived even from this: faith justifies because, if justification happens only through the Word, and the Word is understood only by faith, it follows that faith justifies.—Apology of the Augsburg Confession IV (II) 62, 64–67

## Hymnody

With high delight Let us unite In songs of great jubilation. Ye pure in heart,
All bear your part, Sing Jesus Christ, our salvation. To set us free Forever,
He Is ris’n and sends To all earth’s ends Good news to save ev’ry nation.—
With High Delight Let Us Unite (LSB 483:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus, Paul, Your apostle to the Gentiles, proclaimed the kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus Christ while in prison in Rome. In our freedom to worship You rightly, give us burning hearts when we hear Moses and the Prophets expounded before us, and open our eyes in the breaking of the bread to see You as our Savior and Lord; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1073)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 51–57 [172–178]

[51/172] Augustine well says, “All God’s commandments are fulfilled when whatever is not done, is forgiven.” Therefore, he requires faith even in good works. He says this to show that we may believe we please God for Christ’s sake, and even our works are not worthy and pleasing of themselves.

[52/173] Jerome, against the Pelagians, says:

Then we are righteous when we confess that we are sinners, and that our righteousness stands not in our own merit, but in God’s mercy.

[53/174] Therefore, when starting to fulfill the Law, faith ought to be present, which certainly be lieves that we have a reconciled God for Christ’s sake. For mercy cannot be received except through faith, as has been repeatedly said above.

[54/175] Paul says in Romans 3:31, “Do we then overthrow the law by this faith? By no means! On the contrary, we uphold the law.” Here’s what we ought to understand: People regenerated through faith not only receive the Holy Spirit, and have motives that agree with God’s Law, but we ought also to realize that they are far distant from the Law’s perfection. This point has the greatest importance by far, and we must add it to the argument also.

[55/176] We cannot conclude that we are counted righteous before God because of our fulfilling of the Law. Justification must be sought else where in order that the conscience may become peaceful. For we are not righteous before God as long as we flee from God’s judgment and are angry with God.

[56/177] Therefore, we must conclude that we are counted righteous for Christ’s sake being reconciled through faith. This is not because of the Law or our works. Because of faith, beginning to fulfill the Law pleases God. Because of faith, there is no charge that we fulfill the Law imperfectly, even though the sight of our impurity terrifies us. If justification is to be sought elsewhere, our love and works do not justify.

[57/178] Christ’s death and satisfaction ought to be placed far above our purity, far above the Law itself. This truth ought to be set before us so that we can be sure of this: We have a gracious God because of Christ’s satisfaction and not because of our fulfilling the Law.
