# August 7

## Psalmody

3O LORD, what is man that you re- | gard him,* or the son of man that you | think of him? 4Man is | like a breath;* his days are like a passing | shadow. 5Bow your heavens, O LORD, and | come down!* Touch the mountains so | that they smoke! 6Flash forth the lightning and | scatter them;* send out your arrows and | rout them! 7Stretch out your hand | from on high;* rescue me and deliver me from the many waters, from the hand of | foreigners, 8whose mouths | speak lies* and whose right hand is a right hand of | falsehood. 9I will sing a new song to you, | O God;* upon a ten-stringed harp I will | play to you, 10who gives victo- | ry to kings,* who rescues David his servant from the | cruel sword.—Psalm 144:3–10
Additional Psalm: Psalm 144

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 20:24–42

[Jonathan Warns David]

24So David hid himself in the field. And when the new moon came, the king sat down to eat food. 25The king sat on his seat, as at other times, on the seat by the wall. Jonathan sat opposite, and Abner sat by Saul’s side, but David’s place was empty. 26Yet Saul did not say anything that day, for he thought, “Something has happened to him. He is not clean; surely he is not clean.” 27But on the second day, the day after the new moon, David’s place was empty. And Saul said to Jonathan his son, “Why has not the son of Jesse come to the meal, either yesterday or today?” 28Jonathan answered Saul, “David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem. 29He said, ‘Let me go, for our clan holds a sacrifice in the city, and my brother has commanded me to be there. So now, if I have found favor in your eyes, let me get away and see my brothers.’ For this reason he has not come to the king’s table.” 30Then Saul’s anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said to him, “You son of a perverse, rebellious woman, do I not know that you have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame, and to the shame of your mother’s nakedness? 31For as long as the son of Jesse lives on the earth, neither you nor your kingdom shall be established. Therefore send and bring him to me, for he shall surely die.” 32Then Jonathan answered Saul his father, “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?” 33But Saul hurled his spear at him to strike him. So Jonathan knew that his father was determined to put David to death. 34And Jonathan rose from the table in fierce anger and ate no food the second day of the month, for he was grieved for David, because his father had disgraced him. 35In the morning Jonathan went out into the field to the appointment with David, and with him a little boy. 36And he said to his boy, “Run and find the arrows that I shoot.” As the boy ran, he shot an arrow beyond him. 37And when the boy came to the place of the arrow that Jonathan had shot, Jonathan called after the boy and said, “Is not the arrow beyond you?” 38And Jonathan called after the boy, “Hurry! Be quick! Do not stay!” So Jonathan’s boy gathered up the arrows and came to his master. 39But the boy knew nothing. Only Jonathan and David knew the matter. 40And Jonathan gave his weapons to his boy and said to him, “Go and carry them to the city.” 41And as soon as the boy had gone, David rose from beside the stone heap and fell on his face to the ground and bowed three times. And they kissed one another and wept with one another, David weeping the most. 42Then Jonathan said to David, “Go in peace, because we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord, saying, ‘The Lord shall be between me and you, and between my offspring and your offspring, forever.’” And he rose and departed, and Jonathan went into the city. Additional Reading: 1 Samuel 21:1–23:29

## New Testament Reading: 1 Corinthians 1:1–25

Greeting

1Paul, called by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus, and our brother Sosthenes, 2To the church of God that is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints together with all those who in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord and ours: 3Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thanksgiving

4I give thanks to my God always for you because of the grace of God that was given you in Christ Jesus, 5that in every way you were enriched in him in all speech and all knowledge—6even as the testimony about Christ was confirmed among you—7so that you are not lacking in any spiritual gift, as you wait for the revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 8who will sustain you to the end, guiltless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 9God is faithful, by whom you were called into the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Divisions in the Church

10I appeal to you, brothers, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all of you agree, and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be united in the same mind and the same judgment. 11For it has been reported to me by Chloe’s people that there is quarreling among you, my brothers. 12What I mean is that each one of you says, “I follow Paul,” or “I follow Apollos,” or “I follow Cephas,” or “I follow Christ.” 13Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul? 14I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crispus and Gaius, 15so that no one may say that you were baptized in my name. 16(I did baptize also the household of Stephanas. Beyond that, I do not know whether I baptized anyone else.) 17For Christ did not send me to baptize but to preach the gospel, and not with words of eloquent wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power.

Christ the Wisdom and Power of God

18For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. 19For it is written, “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the discernment of the discerning I will thwart.” 20Where is the one who is wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? 21For since, in the wisdom of God, the world did not know God through wisdom, it pleased God through the folly of what we preach to save those who believe. 22For Jews demand signs and Greeks seek wisdom, 23but we preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and folly to Gentiles, 24but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. 25For the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.

## Writing

O compassionate and merciful, long-suffering, and very gracious and true God, look from Your prepared dwelling-place, and hear Your suppliants, and deliver us from every temptation of the devil and of man. Do not withhold Your aid from us, nor bring on us chastisements too heavy for our strength. We are unable to overcome what is opposed to us, but You are able, Lord, to save us from everything that is against us. Save us, O God, from the difficulties of this world, according to Your goodness. Save us, who have come with a pure conscience to Your holy altar, that we may offer without condemnation the blessed thrice-holy hymn together with the heavenly powers. Save us, that having performed the service, well pleasing to You and divine, we may be counted worthy of eternal life. Because You, Lord our God, are holy, and because You dwell and abide in holy places, we offer the praise and the thrice-holy hymn to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity. Holy God, Holy [and] Strong, Holy [and] Immortal, have mercy on us. Holy God, Holy [and] Strong, Holy [and] Immortal, have mercy on us. Holy God, Holy [and] Strong, Holy [and] Immortal, have mercy on us. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.—Liturgy of Saint James

## Hymnody

Wisdom’s highest, noblest treasure, Jesus, is revealed in You. Let me find in
You my pleasure, And my wayward will subdue, Humility there and
simplicity reigning, In paths of true wisdom my steps ever training. If I
learn from Jesus this knowledge divine, The blessing of heavenly wisdom is
mine.—One Thing’s Needful (LSB 536:3)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, whose infinite love restores to the right way those who err, gathers the scattered, and preserves those whom You have gathered, of Your tender mercy pour out on Your Christian people the grace of unity that, all schisms being healed, Your flock, gathered to the true Shepherd of Your Church, may serve You in all faithfulness; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1155)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 58–61 [179–182]

[58/179] Paul teaches this in Galatians 3:13, when he says, “Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us.” This means that the Law condemns all people. But Christ—without sin—has borne the punishment of sin. He has been made a victim for us and has removed that right of the Law to accuse and condemn those who believe in Him. He Himself is the Atonement for them. For His sake they are now counted righteous. Since they are counted righteous, the Law cannot accuse or condemn them, even though they have not actually satisfied the Law. Paul writes the same way to the Colossians, “You have been filled in Him” (2:10). This is like saying, “Although you are still far from the perfection of the Law, the remnants of sin do not condemn you. For Christ’s sake we have a sure and firm reconciliation, if you believe, even though sin dwells in your flesh.”

[59/180] The promise should always be in sight. Because of His promise, God wishes to be gracious and to justify for Christ’s sake, not because of the Law or our works. In this promise timid consciences should seek reconciliation and justification. By this promise they should sustain themselves and be confident that they have a gracious God for Christ’s sake, because of His promise. So works can never make a conscience peaceful.

[60/181] Only the promise can. If justification and peace of conscience must be sought in something other than love and works, then love and works do not justify. This is true even though they are virtues and belong to the righteousness of the Law, insofar as they are a fulfilling of the Law. Obedience to the Law justifies by the righteousness of the Law—if a person fulfills it. But imperfect righteousness of the Law is not accepted by God unless it is accepted because of faith. So legal righteousness does not justify, that is, it neither reconciles nor regenerates nor by itself makes us acceptable before God.

[61/182] From this it is clear that we are justified before God through faith alone. Through faith alone we receive forgiveness of sins and reconciliation, because reconciliation or justification is a matter promised for Christ’s sake, not for the Law’s sake. Therefore, it is received through faith alone, although, when the Holy Spirit is given, the fulfilling of the Law follows.
