# August 12

## Psalmody

1The LORD reigns; let the peoples | tremble!* He sits enthroned upon the cherubim; let the | earth quake! 2The LORD is great in | Zion;* he is exalted over all the | peoples. 3Let them praise your great and | awesome name!* Ho- | ly is he! 4The King in his might loves | justice.* You have established equity; you have executed justice and righteousness in | Jacob. 5Exalt the LORD our God; worship at his | footstool!* Ho- | ly is he!—Psalm 99:1–5
Additional Psalm: Psalm 99

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 28:3–25

Saul and the Medium of En-dor

3Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried him in Ramah, his own city. And Saul had put the mediums and the necromancers out of the land. 4The Philistines assembled and came and encamped at Shunem. And Saul gathered all Israel, and they encamped at Gilboa. 5When Saul saw the army of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly. 6And when Saul inquired of the LORD, the LORD did not answer him, either by dreams, or by Urim, or by prophets. 7Then Saul said to his servants, “Seek out for me a woman who is a medium, that I may go to her and inquire of her.” And his servants said to him, “Behold, there is a medium at En-dor.” 8So Saul disguised himself and put on other garments and went, he and two men with him. And they came to the woman by night. And he said, “Divine for me by a spirit and bring up for me whomever I shall name to you.” 9The woman said to him, “Surely you know what Saul has done, how he has cut off the mediums and the necromancers from the land. Why then are you laying a trap for my life to bring about my death?” 10But Saul swore to her by the LORD, “As the LORD lives, no punishment shall come upon you for this thing.” 11Then the woman said, “Whom shall I bring up for you?” He said, “Bring up Samuel for me.” 12When the woman saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice. And the woman said to Saul, “Why have you deceived me? You are Saul.” 13The king said to her, “Do not be afraid. What do you see?” And the woman said to Saul, “I see a god coming up out of the earth.” 14He said to her, “What is his appearance?” And she said, “An old man is coming up, and he is wrapped in a robe.” And Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground and paid homage. 15Then Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed me by bringing me up?” Saul answered, “I am in great distress, for the Philistines are warring against me, and God has turned away from me and answers me no more, either by prophets or by dreams. Therefore I have summoned you to tell me what I shall do.” 16And Samuel said, “Why then do you ask me, since the LORD has turned from you and become your enemy? 17The LORD has done to you as he spoke by me, for the LORD has torn the kingdom out of your hand and given it to your neighbor, David. 18Because you did not obey the voice of the LORD and did not carry out his fierce wrath against Amalek, therefore the LORD has done this thing to you this day. 19Moreover, the LORD will give Israel also with you into the hand of the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons shall be with me. The LORD will give the army of Israel also into the hand of the Philistines.” 20Then Saul fell at once full length on the ground, filled with fear because of the words of Samuel. And there was no strength in him, for he had eaten nothing all day and all night. 21And the woman came to Saul, and when she saw that he was terrified, she said to him, “Behold, your servant has obeyed you. I have taken my life in my hand and have listened to what you have said to me. 22Now therefore, you also obey your servant. Let me set a morsel of bread before you; and eat, that you may have strength when you go on your way.” 23He refused and said, “I will not eat.” But his servants, together with the woman, urged him, and he listened to their words. So he arose from the earth and sat on the bed. 24Now the woman had a fattened calf in the house, and she quickly killed it, and she took flour and kneaded it and baked unleavened bread of it, 25and she put it before Saul and his servants, and they ate. Then they rose and went away that night. Additional Reading: 1 Samuel 29:1–30:31

## New Testament Reading: 1 Corinthians 6:1–20

Lawsuits Against Believers

1When one of you has a grievance against another, does he dare go to law before the unrighteous instead of the saints? 2Or do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you incompetent to try trivial cases? 3Do you not know that we are to judge angels? How much more, then, matters pertaining to this life! 4So if you have such cases, why do you lay them before those who have no standing in the church? 5I say this to your shame. Can it be that there is no one among you wise enough to settle a dispute between the brothers, 6but brother goes to law against brother, and that before unbelievers? 7To have lawsuits at all with one another is already a defeat for you. Why not rather suffer wrong? Why not rather be defrauded? 8But you yourselves wrong and defraud—even your own brothers! 9Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality, 10nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. 11And such were some of you. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.

Flee Sexual Immorality

12“All things are lawful for me,” but not all things are helpful. “All things are lawful for me,” but I will not be enslaved by anything. 13“Food is meant for the stomach and the stomach for food”—and God will destroy both one and the other. The body is not meant for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. 14And God raised the Lord and will also raise us up by his power. 15Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? Never! 16Or do you not know that he who is joined to a prostitute becomes one body with her? For, as it is written, “The two will become one flesh.” 17But he who is joined to the Lord becomes one spirit with him. 18Flee from sexual immorality. Every other sin a person commits is outside the body, but the sexually immoral person sins against his own body. 19Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, whom you have from God? You are not your own, 20for you were bought with a price. So glorify God in your body.

## Writing

Oh, what mad, senseless fools are we! While we must ever live and dwell among such mighty enemies as the devils, we still despise our weapons and defense [2 Corinthians 10:4], and we are too lazy to look at or think of them! What else are such proud, arrogant saints doing who are unwilling to read and study the catechism daily? They think they are much more learned than God Himself with all His saints, angels, prophets, apostles, and all Christians. God Himself is not ashamed to teach these things daily. He knows nothing better to teach. He always keeps teaching the same thing and does not take up anything new or different. All the saints know nothing better or different to learn and cannot finish learning this. Are we not the finest of all fellows to imagine that if we have once read or heard the catechism, we know it all and have no further need to read and learn? Can we finish learning in one hour what God Himself cannot finish teaching? He is engaged in teaching this from the beginning to the end of the world. All prophets, together with all saints, have been busy learning it, have ever remained students, and must continue to be students. It must be true that whoever knows the Ten Commandments perfectly must know all the Scriptures [Matthew 7:12]. So, in all matters and cases, he can advise, help, comfort, judge, and decide both spiritual and temporal matters. Such a person must be qualified to sit in judgment over all doctrines, estates, spirits, laws, and whatever else is in the world [1 Corinthians 6:2–3]. And what, indeed, is the entire Book of Psalms but thoughts and exercises upon the First Commandment? Now I truly know that such lazy “bellies” and arrogant spirits do not understand a single psalm, much less the entire Holy Scriptures. Yet they pretend to know and despise the catechism, which is a short and brief summary of all the Holy Scriptures.—Large Catechism Longer Preface 15–18

## Hymnody

Thy death, not mine, O Christ, Has paid the ransom due; Ten thousand
deaths like mine Would have been all too few. To whom save Thee, Who
canst alone For sin atone, Lord, shall I flee?—Thy Works, Not Mine, O
Christ (LSB 565:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, unto whom all hearts are open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hidden, cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of Your Holy Spirit that we may perfectly love You and worthily magnify Your holy name; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (211)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 89–96 [210–217]

[89/210] In a similar way, the Lord’s Supper was instituted in the Church. So by remembering Christ’s promises (about which we are taught in this Sacrament), faith would be strengthened in us, and we would publicly confess our faith and proclaim Christ’s benefits, as Paul says in 1 Corinthians 11:26, “For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until He comes.” But our adversaries contend that the Mass is a work that justifies us by the outward work (ex opere operato) and removes the guilt and liability to punishment in those for whom it is celebrated. That’s what Gabriel Biel writes.

[90/211] Anthony, Bernard, Dominic, Francis, and other Holy Fathers selected a certain kind of life either for the sake of study or other useful exercises. In the meantime, they believed that by faith they were counted righteous for Christ’s sake and that God was gracious to them, not because of their own exercises. But the multitude since then has imitated not the faith of the Fathers, but their example without faith. By such works the multitude thought they might merit forgiveness of sins, grace, and righteousness. They did not believe that they received these freely on account of Christ as the Atoning Sacrifice.

[91/212] The world judges that all works are an atonement by which God is appeased. They are a price by which we are counted righteous. It does not believe that Christ is the Atonement. It does not believe that through faith we are freely counted righteous for Christ’s sake. Since works cannot ease the conscience, other works are continually chosen, new rites are performed, new vows are made, and new orders of monks are formed beyond God’s command, in order that some great work may be sought that may be set against God’s wrath and judgment.

[92/213] Contrary to Scripture, the adversaries uphold these godless opinions about works. They say these things about our works: they are an atonement, they merit forgiveness of sins and grace, and we are counted righteous before God by them (and not through faith, for Christ’s sake as the Atonement). What is this other than to deny Christ the honor of Mediator and Atoning Sacrifice?

[93/214] We believe and teach that good works must be done (fulfilling of the Law ought to follow faith). Nevertheless, we give Christ His own honor. We believe and teach that through faith, for Christ’s sake, we are counted righteous before God. We are not counted righteous because of works without Christ as Mediator. We do not merit forgiveness of sins, grace, and righteousness by works. We cannot set our works against God’s wrath and justice. Works cannot overcome the terrors of sin. But the terrors of sin are overcome through faith alone. Only Christ the Mediator is to be presented by faith against God’s wrath and judgment.

[94/215] If anyone thinks differently, he does not give Christ due honor. Christ has been set forth so that He might be an Atonement, that through Him we might have access to the Father.

[95/216] We are speaking now about the righteousness through which we approach God (not humans) but by which we receive grace and peace of conscience.

[96/217] Conscience, however, cannot be eased before God, unless through faith alone. Faith is certain that God for Christ’s sake is reconciled to us, according to Romans 5:1, “Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace.” This is because justification is only a matter freely promised for Christ’s sake. Therefore, it is always received before God through faith alone.
