# August 13

## Psalmody

1God shall arise, his enemies shall be | scattered;* and those who hate him shall flee be- | fore him! 2As smoke is driven away, so you shall drive | them away;* as wax melts before fire, so the wicked shall perish be- | fore God! 3But the righteous shall be glad; they shall exult be- | fore God;* they shall be jubilant | with joy! 4Sing to God, sing praises | to his name;* lift up a song to him who rides through the deserts; his name is the LORD; exult be- | fore him! 5Father of the fatherless and protector of | widows* is God in his holy habi- | tation. 6God settles the solitary in a home; he leads out the prisoners to pros- | perity,* but the rebellious dwell in a | parched land.—Psalm 68:1–6
Additional Psalm: Psalm 68

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Samuel 31:1–13

The Death of Saul

1Now the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before the Philistines and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. 2And the Philistines overtook Saul and his sons, and the Philistines struck down Jonathan and Abinadab and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul. 3The battle pressed hard against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was badly wounded by the archers. 4Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and mistreat me.” But his armor-bearer would not, for he feared greatly. Therefore Saul took his own sword and fell upon it. 5And when his armor- bearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell upon his sword and died with him. 6Thus Saul died, and his three sons, and his armor-bearer, and all his men, on the same day together. 7And when the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley and those beyond the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned their cities and fled. And the Philistines came and lived in them. 8The next day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 9So they cut off his head and stripped off his armor and sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines, to carry the good news to the house of their idols and to the people. 10They put his armor in the temple of Ashtaroth, and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan. 11But when the inhabitants of Jabesh- gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul, 12all the valiant men arose and went all night and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and they came to Jabesh and burned them there. 13And they took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh and fasted seven days.

## New Testament Reading: 1 Corinthians 7:1–24

Principles for Marriage

1Now concerning the matters about which you wrote: “It is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman.” 2But because of the temptation to sexual immorality, each man should have his own wife and each woman her own husband. 3The husband should give to his wife her conjugal rights, and likewise the wife to her husband. 4For the wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does. Likewise the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does. 5Do not deprive one another, except perhaps by agreement for a limited time, that you may devote yourselves to prayer; but then come together again, so that Satan may not tempt you because of your lack of self-control. 6Now as a concession, not a command, I say this. 7I wish that all were as I myself am. But each has his own gift from God, one of one kind and one of another. 8To the unmarried and the widows I say that it is good for them to remain single as I am. 9But if they cannot exercise self-control, they should marry. For it is better to marry than to burn with passion. 10To the married I give this charge (not I, but the Lord): the wife should not separate from her husband 11(but if she does, she should remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband), and the husband should not divorce his wife. 12To the rest I say (I, not the Lord) that if any brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with him, he should not divorce her. 13If any woman has a husband who is an unbeliever, and he consents to live with her, she should not divorce him. 14For the unbelieving husband is made holy because of his wife, and the unbelieving wife is made holy because of her husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy. 15But if the unbelieving partner separates, let it be so. In such cases the brother or sister is not enslaved. God has called you to peace. 16For how do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?

Live as You Are Called

17Only let each person lead the life that the Lord has assigned to him, and to which God has called him. This is my rule in all the churches. 18Was anyone at the time of his call already circumcised? Let him not seek to remove the marks of circumcision. Was anyone at the time of his call uncircumcised? Let him not seek circumcision. 19For neither circumcision counts for anything nor uncircumcision, but keeping the commandments of God. 20Each one should remain in the condition in which he was called. 21Were you a slave when called? Do not be concerned about it. (But if you can gain your freedom, avail yourself of the opportunity.) 22For he who was called in the Lord as a slave is a freedman of the Lord. Likewise he who was free when called is a slave of Christ. 23You were bought with a price; do not become slaves of men. 24So, brothers, in whatever condition each was called, there let him remain with God.

## Writing

The death of Our Lord is often referred to in Scripture exceedingly clearly. This is so that none would lack instruction in the actual events and thereby err. The prophets were not afraid to mention the cause of His death, even though that death would be at the hands of the people to whom they preached, for He suffers not for His own sake but for the immortality and salvation of all. They say then: “A man in stripes, and knowing how to bear weakness, for His face is turned away: He was dishonored and held in no account. He bears our sins and is in pain on our account; and we reckoned Him to be in labor and in stripes and in ill usage. But He was wounded for our sins and made weak for our wickedness. The chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and by His stripes we were healed.” Marvel at the loving- kindness of the Word, that for our sakes He is dishonored so that we may be brought to honor. “For we all,” it says, “like sheep were gone astray. All mankind had erred in its way, and the Lord delivered Christ for our sins. And He does not open His mouth, though He has been evilly mistreated. As a sheep He was brought to the slaughter, and as a lamb is dumb before the shearer, so He did not open His mouth. By His abasement He took away God’s judgment against mankind.” Then, so that none would conceive from His suffering that He is but a common man, Holy Scripture anticipates the vain imaginings of the heart and declares His exceeding power and the difference of His nature compared with ourselves, saying: “But who shall declare His generation? For His life is taken away. From the wickedness of the people He was brought to death … for He did no wickedness, neither was guile found in His mouth. And the Lord will cleanse Him from His stripes.”—Athanasius of Alexandria

## Hymnody

“Be faithful to your marriage vow; No lust or impure thoughts allow. Keep
all your conduct free from sin By self-controlled discipline.” Have mercy,
Lord!—These Are the Holy Ten Commands (LSB 581:7)

## Prayer of the Day

Most gracious God, we give thanks for the joy and blessings that You grant to husbands and wives. Assist them always by Your grace that with true fidelity and steadfast love they may honor and keep their marriage vows, grow in love toward You and for each other, and come at last to the eternal joys that You have promised; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (243)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 97–103 [218–224]

[97/218] Now we will reply to those passages that the adversaries quote in order to prove that we are justified by love and works. From 1 Corinthians 13:2, they quote, “If I have all faith . . . but have not love, I am nothing.” Here they triumph greatly. Paul testifies to the entire Church (they say) that faith alone does not justify.

[98/219] But a reply is easy after we have shown above what we teach about love and works. This passage of Paul requires love. We also require this. For we have said above that renewal and beginning to fulfill the Law must exist in us, according to Jeremiah 31:33, “I will put My law within them, and I will write it on their hearts.” If anyone should cast away love, even though he has great faith, he does not keep his faith. For he does not keep the Holy Spirit.

[99/220] Nor indeed does Paul in this passage talk about the way of justification. Instead, he writes to those who, after they had been justified, should be urged to bring forth good fruit lest they lose the Holy Spirit.

[100/221] Furthermore, the adversaries treat the matter in a ridiculous way. They quote this one passage, in which Paul teaches about fruit. Yet they leave out many other passages in which he discusses the way of justification in a regular order. Besides, they always add a correction to the other passages that speak of faith, namely, that the passages ought to be understood as applying to “faith formed by love.” They add no correction that there is also need for faith, which believes we are counted righteous for Christ’s sake as the Atonement. So the adversaries exclude Christ from justification and teach only a righteousness of the Law.

[101/222] But let us return to Paul. No one can conclude anything more from this text than this: love is necessary. We confess this. It is also necessary not to steal. But the reasoning will not be correct if someone would put the argument like this: “Not to commit theft is necessary. Therefore, not to commit theft justifies.” Justification is not the approval of a particular work, but of the entire person. Therefore, this passage from Paul does not harm us. Only, the adversaries must not add to it whatever they please by imagination. Paul does not say that love justifies. He says, “I am nothing” [1 Corinthians 13:2]. In other words, faith—however great it may have been—is extinguished. He does not say that love overcomes the terrors of sin and of death, that we can set our love against God’s wrath and judgment, or that our love satisfies God’s Law. He does not say that we have access to God by our love without Christ as the Atoning Sacrifice, that we receive the promised forgiveness of sins by our love. Paul says nothing about this. He does not, therefore, think that love justifies, because we are justified only when we receive Christ as the Atoning Sacrifice and believe that for Christ’s sake God is reconciled to us. Neither is justification even to be dreamed of without Christ as the Atonement.

[102/223] If there is no need of Christ, if we can overcome death by our love, if we have access to God by our love without Christ as the Atonement, then let our adversaries remove the promise about Christ. Let them abolish the Gospel.

[103/224] The adversaries corrupt very many passages, because they bring to them their own opinions and do not derive the meaning from the passages themselves. For what difficulty is there in this passage if we remove the interpretation that the adversaries attach to it out of their own mind? They do not understand what justification is or how it occurs. The Corinthians, being justified before, had received many excellent gifts. In the beginning, they glowed with zeal, just as is generally the case. Then dissensions began to arise among them, as Paul points out. They began to dislike good teachers. So Paul rebuked them, calling them back to offices of love. These are necessary. Yet it would be foolish to imagine that works of the Second Table (through which we interact with humans and not properly with God) justify us. But in justification we interact with God. His wrath must be appeased and conscience must be eased about God. None of these happen through the works of the Second Table.
