# August 22

## Psalmody

6The heavens proclaim his | righteousness,* and all the peoples see his | glory. 7All worshipers of images are put to shame, who make their boast in worthless | idols;* worship him, | all you gods! 8Zion hears and is glad, and the daughters of Ju- | dah rejoice,* because of your judgments, | O LORD. 9For you, O LORD, are most high over | all the earth;* you are exalted far a- | bove all gods. 10O you who love the LORD, hate | evil!* He preserves the lives of his saints; he delivers them from the hand of the | wicked. 11Light is sown for the | righteous,* and joy for the up- | right in heart. 12Rejoice in the LORD, O you | righteous,* and give thanks to his | holy name!—Psalm 97:6–12
Additional Psalm: Psalm 97

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Kings 2:1–27

David’s Instructions to Solomon

1When David’s time to die drew near, he commanded Solomon his son, saying, 2“I am about to go the way of all the earth. Be strong, and show yourself a man, 3and keep the charge of the LORD your God, walking in his ways and keeping his statutes, his commandments, his rules, and his testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses, that you may prosper in all that you do and wherever you turn, 4that the LORD may establish his word that he spoke concerning me, saying, ‘If your sons pay close attention to their way, to walk before me in faithfulness with all their heart and with all their soul, you shall not lack a man on the throne of Israel.’ 5“Moreover, you also know what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, how he dealt with the two commanders of the armies of Israel, Abner the son of Ner, and Amasa the son of Jether, whom he killed, avenging in time of peace for blood that had been shed in war, and putting the blood of war on the belt around his waist and on the sandals on his feet. 6Act therefore according to your wisdom, but do not let his gray head go down to Sheol in peace. 7But deal loyally with the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be among those who eat at your table, for with such loyalty they met me when I fled from Absalom your brother. 8And there is also with you Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjaminite from Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse on the day when I went to Mahanaim. But when he came down to meet me at the Jordan, I swore to him by the LORD, saying, ‘I will not put you to death with the sword.’ 9Now therefore do not hold him guiltless, for you are a wise man. You will know what you ought to do to him, and you shall bring his gray head down with blood to Sheol.”

The Death of David

10Then David slept with his fathers and was buried in the city of David. 11And the time that David reigned over Israel was forty years. He reigned seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem. 12So Solomon sat on the throne of David his father, and his kingdom was firmly established.

Solomon’s Reign Established

13Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, “Do you come peacefully?” He said, “Peacefully.” 14Then he said, “I have something to say to you.” She said, “Speak.” 15He said, “You know that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel fully expected me to reign. However, the kingdom has turned about and become my brother’s, for it was his from the LORD. 16And now I have one request to make of you; do not refuse me.” She said to him, “Speak.” 17And he said, “Please ask King Solomon—he will not refuse you—to give me Abishag the Shunammite as my wife.” 18Bathsheba said, “Very well; I will speak for you to the king.” 19So Bathsheba went to King Solomon to speak to him on behalf of Adonijah. And the king rose to meet her and bowed down to her. Then he sat on his throne and had a seat brought for the king’s mother, and she sat on his right. 20Then she said, “I have one small request to make of you; do not refuse me.” And the king said to her, “Make your request, my mother, for I will not refuse you.” 21She said, “Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah your brother as his wife.” 22King Solomon answered his mother, “And why do you ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? Ask for him the kingdom also, for he is my older brother, and on his side are Abiathar the priest and Joab the son of Zeruiah.” 23Then King Solomon swore by the LORD, saying, “God do so to me and more also if this word does not cost Adonijah his life! 24Now therefore as the LORD lives, who has established me and placed me on the throne of David my father, and who has made me a house, as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death today.” 25So King Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and he struck him down, and he died. 26And to Abiathar the priest the king said, “Go to Anathoth, to your estate, for you deserve death. But I will not at this time put you to death, because you carried the ark of the Lord GOD before David my father, and because you shared in all my father’s affliction.” 27So Solomon expelled Abiathar from being priest to the LORD, thus fulfilling the word of the Lord that he had spoken concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

## New Testament Reading: 1 Corinthians 13:1–13

The Way of Love

1If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I am a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal. 2And if I have prophetic powers, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith, so as to remove mountains, but have not love, I am nothing. 3If I give away all I have, and if I deliver up my body to be burned, but have not love, I gain nothing. 4Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant 5or rude. It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; 6it does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth. 7Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. 8Love never ends. As for prophecies, they will pass away; as for tongues, they will cease; as for knowledge, it will pass away. 9For we know in part and we prophesy in part, 10but when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away. 11When I was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I gave up childish ways. 12For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I have been fully known. 13So now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is love. Additional Reading: 1 Corinthians 14:1–16:24

## Writing

Paul says in 1 Corinthians 13:13, “The greatest of these is love.” … Paul, in this passage, properly speaks about love toward one’s neighbor and indicates that love is the greatest, because it has the most fruit. Faith and hope have to do only with God. But love has infinite offices outwardly toward humanity. Indeed, let us grant to the adversaries that love toward God and our neighbor is the greatest virtue, because the chief commandment is this: “You shall love the Lord your God” (Matthew 22:37). But how will they conclude [their argument] from this that love justifies? They say, “The greatest virtue justifies.” By no means! For just as the greatest, or first, Law does not justify, so also the Law’s greatest virtue does not justify. But the virtue that justifies receives Christ, which brings to us Christ’s merits, by which we receive grace and peace from God. This virtue is faith. As it has often been said, faith is not just knowledge. But it is willing to receive or take hold of those things that are offered in the promise about Christ. Furthermore, this obedience toward God (i.e., to want to receive the offered promise) is no less a divine service (latreia) than is love. God wants us to believe Him and to receive from Him blessings. He declares this to be true divine service.—Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 104–107 [225–228] We believe, teach, and confess that the contrition that comes before justification, and the good works that follow it, do not belong to the article of justification before God. Yet one is not to imagine a kind of faith that can exist and abide with, and alongside of, a wicked intention to sin and to act against the conscience. But after man has been justified through faith, then a true living faith works by love (Galatians 5:6). Good works always follow justifying faith and are surely found with it—if it is true and living faith [James 2:26]. Faith is never alone, but always has love and hope with it [1 Corinthians 13:13].—Epitome of the Formula of Concord III 11

## Hymnody

Love in Christ abides forever, Fainting not when ills attend; Love, forgiving
and forgiven, Shall endure until life’s end.—Love in Christ Is Strong and
Living (LSB 706:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and everlasting God, give us an increase of faith, hope, and charity; and that we may obtain what You have promised, make us love what You have commanded; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (H73)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 148–152 [269–273]

[27/148] Faith alone looks upon the promise. It knows that because of the promise, it is absolutely certain that God forgives, because Christ has not died in vain. Such faith overcomes the terrors of sin and death.

[28/149] If anyone doubts whether sins are forgiven him, he dishonors Christ. For he judges that his sin is greater or more effective than Christ’s death and promise, even though Paul says, “Where sin increased, grace abounded all the more” (Romans 5:20). This means that mercy is more comprehensive than sin.

[29/150] If anyone thinks that he receives forgiveness of sins because he loves, he dishonors Christ and will discover in God’s judgment that this confidence in his own righteousness is wicked and useless. Likewise, it is necessary that faith alone reconciles and justifies.

[30/151] We do not receive forgiveness of sins through other powers of the Law, or because of these: patience, chastity, obedience toward magistrates, and so on. (Nevertheless, these virtues ought to follow faith.) Likewise, we do not receive forgiveness of sins because of love for God, even though this must follow.

[31/152] Besides, this way of speaking is well known. At times we use a word for something and we use the same word for the cause and effects of that thing (synecdoche). For example, in Luke 7:47, Christ says, “Her sins, which are many, are forgiven—for she loved much.” Christ Himself interprets this when He adds, “Your faith has saved you” [7:50]. Christ did not mean that the woman had merited forgiveness of sins by that work of love.
