# August 24

## Psalmody

1The LORD is my light and my salvation; whom | shall I fear?* The LORD is the stronghold of my life; of whom shall I | be afraid? 7Hear, O LORD, when I | cry aloud;* be gracious to me and | answer me! 8You have said, | “Seek my face.”* My heart says to you, “Your face, LORD, | do I seek.” 9Hide not your face from me. Turn not your servant away in | anger,* O you who have been my help. Cast me not off; forsake me not, O God of my sal- | vation! 10For my father and my mother have for- | saken me,* but the LORD will | take me in. 11Teach me your way, | O LORD,* and lead me on a level path because of my | enemies.—Psalm 27:1, 7–11
Additional Psalm: Psalm 27

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Kings 5:1–18

Preparations for Building the Temple

1Now Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon when he heard that they had anointed him king in place of his father, for Hiram always loved David. 2And Solomon sent word to Hiram, 3“You know that David my father could not build a house for the name of the LORD his God because of the warfare with which his enemies surrounded him, until the LORD put them under the soles of his feet. 4But now the LORD my God has given me rest on every side. There is neither adversary nor misfortune. 5And so I intend to build a house for the name of the LORD my God, as the LORD said to David my father, ‘Your son, whom I will set on your throne in your place, shall build the house for my name.’ 6Now therefore command that cedars of Lebanon be cut for me. And my servants will join your servants, and I will pay you for your servants such wages as you set, for you know that there is no one among us who knows how to cut timber like the Sidonians.” 7As soon as Hiram heard the words of Solomon, he rejoiced greatly and said, “Blessed be the LORD this day, who has given to David a wise son to be over this great people.” 8And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, “I have heard the message that you have sent to me. I am ready to do all you desire in the matter of cedar and cypress timber. 9My servants shall bring it down to the sea from Lebanon, and I will make it into rafts to go by sea to the place you direct. And I will have them broken up there, and you shall receive it. And you shall meet my wishes by providing food for my household.” 10So Hiram supplied Solomon with all the timber of cedar and cypress that he desired, 11while Solomon gave Hiram 20,000 cors of wheat as food for his household, and 20,000 cors of beaten oil. Solomon gave this to Hiram year by year. 12And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him. And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and the two of them made a treaty. 13King Solomon drafted forced labor out of all Israel, and the draft numbered 30,000 men. 14And he sent them to Lebanon, 10,000 a month in shifts. They would be a month in Lebanon and two months at home. Adoniram was in charge of the draft. 15Solomon also had 70,000 burden- bearers and 80,000 stonecutters in the hill country, 16besides Solomon’s 3,300 chief officers who were over the work, who had charge of the people who carried on the work. 17At the king’s command they quarried out great, costly stones in order to lay the foundation of the house with dressed stones. 18So Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders and the men of Gebal did the cutting and prepared the timber and the stone to build the house. Additional Reading: 1 Kings 6:1–7:50

## New Testament Reading: 2 Corinthians 1:23–2:17

[Paul’s Change of Plans]

23But I call God to witness against me—it was to spare you that I refrained from coming again to Corinth. 24Not that we lord it over your faith, but we work with you for your joy, for you stand firm in your faith. 2:1For I made up my mind not to make another painful visit to you. 2For if I cause you pain, who is there to make me glad but the one whom I have pained? 3And I wrote as I did, so that when I came I might not suffer pain from those who should have made me rejoice, for I felt sure of all of you, that my joy would be the joy of you all. 4For I wrote to you out of much affliction and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to cause you pain but to let you know the abundant love that I have for you.

Forgive the Sinner

5Now if anyone has caused pain, he has caused it not to me, but in some measure—not to put it too severely—to all of you. 6For such a one, this punishment by the majority is enough, 7so you should rather turn to forgive and comfort him, or he may be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow. 8So I beg you to reaffirm your love for him. 9For this is why I wrote, that I might test you and know whether you are obedient in everything. 10Anyone whom you forgive, I also forgive. Indeed, what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, has been for your sake in the presence of Christ, 11so that we would not be outwitted by Satan; for we are not ignorant of his designs.

Triumph in Christ

12When I came to Troas to preach the gospel of Christ, even though a door was opened for me in the Lord, 13my spirit was not at rest because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I took leave of them and went on to Macedonia. 14But thanks be to God, who in Christ always leads us in triumphal procession, and through us spreads the fragrance of the knowledge of him everywhere. 15For we are the aroma of Christ to God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing, 16to one a fragrance from death to death, to the other a fragrance from life to life. Who is sufficient for these things? 17For we are not, like so many, peddlers of God’s word, but as men of sincerity, as commissioned by God, in the sight of God we speak in Christ.

## Writing

[C]onsider by [St. Paul’s] example how important a matter is the care of souls … The manifold character of his ministry? Consider his loving- kindness and, on the other hand, his strictness and the combination and blending of the two in such way that his gentleness should not weaken nor his severity exasperate… On behalf of some he gives thanks; others he upbraids. Some he names his joy and crown; others he charges with folly. Some who hold a straight course he accompanies, sharing in their zeal; others who are going wrong he checks. At one time he excommunicates; at another he confirms his love. At one time he grieves; at another rejoices. At one time he feeds with milk; at another he handles mysteries. At one time he condescends; at another he raises to his own level. At one time he threatens a rod; at another he offers the spirit of meekness. At one time he is haughty toward the lofty; at another lowly toward the lowly. Now he is least of the apostles, now he offers a proof of Christ speaking in him; now he longs for departure and is being poured forth as a libation, now he thinks it more necessary for their sakes to abide in the flesh. For he seeks not his own interests, but those of his children whom he has begotten in Christ by the Gospel. This is the aim of all his spiritual authority, in everything to neglect his own in comparison with the advantage of others.—Gregory of Nazianzus

## Hymnody

All praise for him whose candor Through all his doubt You saw When
Philip at the fig tree Disclosed You in the law. Discern, beneath our surface,
O Lord, what we can be, That by Your truth made guileless, Your glory we
may see.—By All Your Saints in Warfare (LSB 518:23)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, Your Son, Jesus Christ, chose Bartholomew to be an apostle to preach the blessed Gospel. Grant that Your Church may love what he believed and preach what he taught; through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F25) St. Bartholomew, Apostle St. Bartholomew (or Nathanael, as he is called in St. John’s Gospel) was one of the first of Jesus’ twelve disciples. His home was in the town of Cana, in Galilee (John 21:2), where Jesus’ performed His first miracle. He was invited to become one of the Twelve by Philip, who told him that they had found the Messiah in the person of Jesus of Nazareth. (John 1:45). Bartholomew’s initial hesitation to believe, because of Jesus’ Nazareth background, was quickly replaced by a clear, unequivocal declaration of faith, “You are the Son of God! You are the King of Israel!” (John 1:49). He was present with the other disciples (John 21:1–13) when they were privileged to see and converse and eat with their risen Lord and Savior. According to some Early Church Fathers, Bartholomew brought the Gospel to Armenia, where he was martyred by being flayed alive.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 160–166 [281–287]

[39/160] In the second place, this fulfilling of the Law, or obedience toward the Law, is indeed righteousness, when it is complete. But it is small and impure in us. So our righteousness is not pleasing for its own sake and is not accepted for its own sake.

[40/161] From what has been said above, it is clear that justification means not the beginning of the renewal, but the reconciliation by which we are accepted afterward. It can now be seen much more clearly that starting to fulfill the Law does not justify, because such fulfillment is only accepted on account of faith. Nor must we trust that we are accounted righteous before God by our own perfection and fulfilling of the Law, but rather for Christ’s sake.

[41/162] ‹In the third place,› Christ does not stop being our Mediator after we have been renewed. They err who imagine that He has merited only a first grace, and that, afterward, we please God and merit eternal life by our fulfilling of the Law.

[42/163] Christ remains Mediator, and we should always be confident that for His sake we have a reconciled God, even though we are unworthy. Paul clearly teaches this when he says, “I am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not thereby acquitted” (1 Corinthians 4:4). Paul knows that through faith he is counted righteous for Christ’s sake, according to the passage “Blessed is the one whose transgression is forgiven” (Psalm 32:1; see also Romans 4:7). But this forgiveness is always received through faith. Likewise, the credit for the righteousness of the Gospel comes from the promise. Therefore, it is always received through faith. It must always be regarded as certain that we are counted righteous through faith for Christ’s sake.

[43/164] If the regenerate afterward think that they will be accepted because of the fulfilling of the Law, when would a conscience be certain that it pleased God?

[44/165] We never satisfy the Law! So we must always run back to the promise. Our infirmity must be recognized in this matter. We must regard it as certain that we are counted righteous for the sake of Christ, “who is at the right hand of God, who indeed is interceding for us” (Romans 8:34). If anyone thinks that he is righteous and accepted because of his own fulfillment of the Law, and not because of Christ’s promise, he dishonors this High Priest. This cannot be understood. How could someone imagine that a person is righteous before God when Christ is excluded as the Atoning Sacrifice and Mediator?

[45/166] ‹In the fourth place,› what need is there of a long discussion? All Scripture, all the Church cries out that the Law cannot be satisfied. Therefore, starting to fulfill the Law does not please on its own account, but on account of faith in Christ.
