# August 23

## Psalmody

1Praise the LORD! I will give thanks to the LORD with my | whole heart,* in the company of the upright, in the congre- | gation. 2Great are the works | of the LORD,* studied by all who de- | light in them. 3Full of splendor and majesty | is his work,* and his righteousness endures for- | ever. 9He sent redemption to his people; he has commanded his covenant for- | ever.* Holy and awesome | is his name! 10The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom; all those who practice it have a good under- | standing.* His praise endures for- | ever!—Psalm 111:1–3, 9–10
Additional Psalm: Psalm 49

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Kings 3:1–15

Solomon’s Prayer for Wisdom

1Solomon made a marriage alliance with Pharaoh king of Egypt. He took Pharaoh’s daughter and brought her into the city of David until he had finished building his own house and the house of the LORD and the wall around Jerusalem. 2The people were sacrificing at the high places, however, because no house had yet been built for the name of the LORD. 3Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of David his father, only he sacrificed and made offerings at the high places. 4And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, for that was the great high place. Solomon used to offer a thousand burnt offerings on that altar. 5At Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night, and God said, “Ask what I shall give you.” 6And Solomon said, “You have shown great and steadfast love to your servant David my father, because he walked before you in faithfulness, in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart toward you. And you have kept for him this great and steadfast love and have given him a son to sit on his throne this day. 7And now, O LORD my God, you have made your servant king in place of David my father, although I am but a little child. I do not know how to go out or come in. 8And your servant is in the midst of your people whom you have chosen, a great people, too many to be numbered or counted for multitude. 9Give your servant therefore an understanding mind to govern your people, that I may discern between good and evil, for who is able to govern this your great people?” 10It pleased the Lord that Solomon had asked this. 11And God said to him, “Because you have asked this, and have not asked for yourself long life or riches or the life of your enemies, but have asked for yourself understanding to discern what is right, 12behold, I now do according to your word. Behold, I give you a wise and discerning mind, so that none like you has been before you and none like you shall arise after you. 13I give you also what you have not asked, both riches and honor, so that no other king shall compare with you, all your days. 14And if you will walk in my ways, keeping my statutes and my commandments, as your father David walked, then I will lengthen your days.” 15And Solomon awoke, and behold, it was a dream. Then he came to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and offered up burnt offerings and peace offerings, and made a feast for all his servants. Additional Reading: 1 Kings 3:16–4:34

## New Testament Reading: 2 Corinthians 1:1–22

Greeting

1Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, To the church of God that is at Corinth, with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia: 2Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

God of All Comfort

3Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort, 4who comforts us in all our affliction, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction, with the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God. 5For as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too. 6If we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation; and if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which you experience when you patiently endure the same sufferings that we suffer. 7Our hope for you is unshaken, for we know that as you share in our sufferings, you will also share in our comfort. 8For we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, of the affliction we experienced in Asia. For we were so utterly burdened beyond our strength that we despaired of life itself. 9Indeed, we felt that we had received the sentence of death. But that was to make us rely not on ourselves but on God who raises the dead. 10He delivered us from such a deadly peril, and he will deliver us. On him we have set our hope that he will deliver us again. 11You also must help us by prayer, so that many will give thanks on our behalf for the blessing granted us through the prayers of many.

Paul’s Change of Plans

12For our boast is this, the testimony of our conscience, that we behaved in the world with simplicity and godly sincerity, not by earthly wisdom but by the grace of God, and supremely so toward you. 13For we are not writing to you anything other than what you read and acknowledge and I hope you will fully acknowledge—14just as you did partially acknowledge us—that on the day of our Lord Jesus you will boast of us as we will boast of you. 15Because I was sure of this, I wanted to come to you first, so that you might have a second experience of grace. 16I wanted to visit you on my way to Macedonia, and to come back to you from Macedonia and have you send me on my way to Judea. 17Was I vacillating when I wanted to do this? Do I make my plans according to the flesh, ready to say “Yes, yes” and “No, no” at the same time? 18As surely as God is faithful, our word to you has not been Yes and No. 19For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, whom we proclaimed among you, Silvanus and Timothy and I, was not Yes and No, but in him it is always Yes. 20For all the promises of God find their Yes in him. That is why it is through him that we utter our Amen to God for his glory. 21And it is God who establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, 22and who has also put his seal on us and given us his Spirit in our hearts as a guarantee.

## Writing

Blessed is He who, because He esteemed us with His overflowing love, sent us His beloved Son, in whom He was well pleased, so that we, reconciled through the Son, might have peace with Him, and so that the Son might be both our Mediator and the Guarantee of this reconciliation. It’s not that we, my brothers, feel anxious under such a devoted Mediator. Neither do we doubt such a trustworthy Surety. But what sort of mediator, you will ask, is born in a stable, is put in a manger, is wrapped in swaddling clothes like the others, cries like others, and finally is laid to rest just like other babies? A thoroughly great Mediator, who brings about not a perfunctory, but an effectual peace through all of these things! He is indeed a baby, but He is also the Word, who is not silent even in His infancy, but says, as our Emmanuel, “God with us,” “Comfort, comfort my people” (Isaiah 40:1). The stable shouts this message, and so do the manger, the tears and the swaddling clothes. The stable cries out that we can trust the One who cares for us like the man who fell among robbers on the road to Jericho was cared for (Luke 10:30). The manger proclaims that the same man who was compared to steeds (Psalm 68:18) was fed with fodder as a baby. The tears and the swaddling clothes declare that we are washed and cleansed by the cruel wounds of this same person. For Christ did not undergo any of these things for Himself; He endured them all for us.… Let us therefore revere Him in the manger, on the cross, at the sepulchre. We devoutly receive the One who tenderly shed blood for us, grew pale for us, and was buried for us. We lovingly adore Him together with the Magi, and we embrace our infant Savior in the temple, together with holy Simeon, as our Mercy. For Christ is indeed the one about whom we read: “the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting” (Psalm 103:17).—Bernard of Clairvaux

## Hymnody

Should some lust or sharp temptation Fascinate my sinful mind, Draw me to
Your cross and passion, And new courage I shall find. Or should Satan press
me hard, Let me then be on my guard, Saying, “Christ for me was
wounded,” That the tempter flee confounded.—Jesus, Grant That Balm and
Healing (LSB 421:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O Lord, Father of all mercy and God of all comfort, You always go before and follow after us. Grant that we may rejoice in Your gracious presence and continually be given to all good works; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (C63)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 153–159 [274–280]
