# August 31

## Psalmody

15O mountain of God, mountainof | Bashan;* O many-peaked mountain, mountain of | Bashan! 16Why do you look with hatred, O many-peaked | mountain,* at the mount that God desired for his abode, yes, where the LORDwill dwell for- | ever? 17The chariots of God are twice ten thousand, thousands upon | thousands;* the Lord is among them; Sinai is now in the sanctu- | ary. 18You ascended on high, leading a host of captives in your train and receiving gifts a- | mong men,* even among the rebellious, that the LORD God may | dwell there. 19Blessèd be the Lord, who daily | bears us up;* God is our sal- | vation. 20Our God is a God of sal- | vation,* and to GOD, the Lord, belong deliverances | from death.—Psalm 68:15–20
Additional Psalm: Psalm 70

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Kings 16:29–17:24

Ahab Reigns in Israel

29In the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah, Ahab the son of Omri began to reign over Israel, and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty-two years. 30And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD, more than all who were before him. 31And as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, he took for his wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Sidonians, and went and served Baal and worshiped him. 32He erected an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he built in Samaria. 33And Ahab made an Asherah. Ahab did more to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger than all the kings of Israel who were before him. 34In his days Hiel of Bethel built Jericho. He laid its foundation at the cost of Abiram his firstborn, and set up its gates at the cost of his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD, which he spoke by Joshua the son of Nun.

Elijah Predicts a Drought

17:1Now Elijah the Tishbite, of Tishbe in Gilead, said to Ahab, “As the LORD, the God of Israel, lives, before whom I stand, there shall be neither dew nor rain these years, except by my word.” 2And the word of the LORD came to him: 3“Depart from here and turn eastward and hide yourself by the brook Cherith, which is east of the Jordan. 4You shall drink from the brook, and I have commanded the ravens to feed you there.” 5So he went and did according to the word of the LORD. He went and lived by the brook Cherith that is east of the Jordan. 6And the ravens brought him bread and meat in the morning, and bread and meat in the evening, and he drank from the brook. 7And after a while the brook dried up, because there was no rain in the land.

The Widow of Zarephath

8Then the word of the LORD came to him, 9“Arise, go to Zarephath, which belongs to Sidon, and dwell there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to feed you.” 10So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there gathering sticks. And he called to her and said, “Bring me a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.” 11And as she was going to bring it, he called to her and said, “Bring me a morsel of bread in your hand.” 12And she said, “As the LORD your God lives, I have nothing baked, only a handful of flour in a jar and a little oil in a jug. And now I am gathering a couple of sticks that I may go in and prepare it for myself and my son, that we may eat it and die.” 13And Elijah said to her, “Do not fear; go and do as you have said. But first make me a little cake of it and bring it to me, and afterward make something for yourself and your son. 14For thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, ‘The jar of flour shall not be spent, and the jug of oil shall not be empty, until the day that the LORD sends rain upon the earth.’” 15And she went and did as Elijah said. And she and he and her household ate for many days. 16The jar of flour was not spent, neither did the jug of oil become empty, according to the word of the LORD that he spoke by Elijah.

Elijah Raises the Widow’s Son

17After this the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, became ill. And his illness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. 18And she said to Elijah, “What have you against me, O man of God? You have come to me to bring my sin to remembrance and to cause the death of my son!” 19And he said to her, “Give me your son.” And he took him from her arms and carried him up into the upper chamber where he lodged, and laid him on his own bed. 20And he cried to the LORD, “O LORD my God, have you brought calamity even upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by killing her son?” 21Then he stretched himself upon the child three times and cried to the LORD, “O LORD my God, let this child’s life come into him again.” 22And the LORD listened to the voice of Elijah. And the life of the child came into him again, and he revived. 23And Elijah took the child and brought him down from the upper chamber into the house and delivered him to his mother. And Elijah said, “See, your son lives.” 24And the woman said to Elijah, “Now I know that you are a man of God, and that the word of the LORD in your mouth is truth.”

## New Testament Reading: 2 Corinthians 9:1–15

The Collection for Christians in Jerusalem

1Now it is superfluous for me to write to you about the ministry for the saints, 2for I know your readiness, of which I boast about you to the people of Macedonia, saying that Achaia has been ready since last year. And your zeal has stirred up most of them. 3But I am sending the brothers so that our boasting about you may not prove empty in this matter, so that you may be ready, as I said you would be. 4Otherwise, if some Macedonians come with me and find that you are not ready, we would be humiliated—to say nothing of you—for being so confident. 5So I thought it necessary to urge the brothers to go on ahead to you and arrange in advance for the gift you have promised, so that it may be ready as a willing gift, not as an exaction.

The Cheerful Giver

6The point is this: whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. 7Each one must give as he has decided in his heart, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. 8And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that having all sufficiency in all things at all times, you may abound in every good work. 9As it is written, “He has distributed freely, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures forever.” 10He who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply and multiply your seed for sowing and increase the harvest of your righteousness. 11You will be enriched in every way to be generous in every way, which through us will produce thanksgiving to God. 12For the ministry of this service is not only supplying the needs of the saints but is also overflowing in many thanksgivings to God. 13By their approval of this service, they will glorify God because of your submission flowing from your confession of the gospel of Christ, and the generosity of your contri- bution for them and for all others, 14while they long for you and pray for you, because of the surpassing grace of God upon you. 15Thanks be to God for his inexpressible gift! Additional Reading: 2 Corinthians 10:1–13:14

## Writing

In this matter the following distinction must be noted. The meaning of these expres-sions must be a necessity based on Christ’s ordinance, command, and will and based on our obligation, but not a necessity based on coercion. In other words, when the word necessary is used, it should be under-stood not as force, but only as the order of God’s unchanging will, whose debtors we are. His commandment points out that the creature should be obedient to its Creator. In other places (2 Corinthians 9:7; Philemon 14; and 1 Peter 5:2) something is said to be of necessity that is wrung from a person against his will, by force or otherwise, so that he acts outwardly for the sake of appearance, but without and against his will. God does not want such ‹hypocritical› works. The people of the New Testament are to be a willing people (Psalm 110:3) and sacrifice freely (Psalm 54:6), “not reluctantly or under compulsion” (2 Corinthians 9:7). They are to be “obedient from the heart” (Romans 6:17), “for God loves a cheerful giver” (2 Corinthians 9:7). In this understanding, and in this sense, it is correctly said and taught that truly good works should be done willingly, or from a voluntary spirit, by those whom God’s Son has made free. The dispute about the voluntary nature of good works was engaged in by some people specifically to make this point.… Regarding the unwilling and rebellious flesh, Paul says, “I discipline my body and keep it under control” (1 Corinthians 9:27) and “those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified [slain] the flesh with its passions and desires” (Galatians 5:24). (See also Romans 8:13.) When it is asserted and taught that good works are free to believers in the sense that they are optional for them to do or not to do, this is false, and must be rejected. It is false to say that believers might or could act against ‹God’s Law› and still have faith and God’s favor and grace.—Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord IV 16–20

## Hymnody

I will praise Your great compassion, Faithful Father, God of grace, That
with all our fallen race In our depth of degradation You had mercy so that
we Might be saved eternally.—Oh, How Great Is Your Compassion (LSB
559:5)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, the source of all that is just and good, nourish in us every virtue and bring to completion every good intent that we may grow in grace and bring forth the fruit of good works; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (B75)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 205–212 [326–333]

[84/205] But faith shows God’s presence, since it is certain that God freely forgives and hears us.

[85/206] Furthermore, this godless opinion about works always has existed in the world. The heathen had sacrifices, derived from the fathers. They imitated their works. They did not maintain their faith, but thought that the works were an atonement and price by which God would be reconciled to them.

[86/207] The people in the Law ‹the Israelites› imitated sacrifices with the opinion that they would appease God by means of these works, so to say, ex opere operato. We see here how seriously the prophets rebuke the people: Psalm 50:8, “Not for your sacrifices do I rebuke you,” and Jeremiah 7:22, “I did not speak to your fathers or command them concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices.” Such passages do not condemn works, which God certainly had commanded as outward exercises in this government. They condemn the godless opinion that people thought, that by their works they appeased God’s wrath, and so cast away faith.

[87/208] Because no works ease the conscience, new works, in addition to God’s commands, were made up from time to time. The people of Israel had seen the prophets sacrificing on high places [e.g., 1 Samuel 9:10–14, 19]. Besides, the examples of the saints very greatly move the minds of people who hope to obtain grace by similar works just as these saints received it. Therefore, the people began, with remarkable zeal, to imitate their work, in order that by such a work they might merit forgiveness of sins, grace, and righteousness. But the prophets had been sacrificing on high places, not so that they might merit forgiveness of sins and grace by these works, but because they taught on these places. So they presented a testimony of their faith there.

[88/209] The people had heard that Abraham had sacrificed his son [Genesis 22]. Therefore, they also, in order to appease God by a most cruel and difficult work, put their sons to death [e.g., 2 Kings 16:3]. But Abraham did not sacrifice his son with the opinion that this work was a price and atoning work by which he was counted righteous.

[89/210] In a similar way, the Lord’s Supper was instituted in the Church. So by remembering Christ’s promises (about which we are taught in this Sacrament), faith would be strengthened in us, and we would publicly confess our faith and proclaim Christ’s benefits, as Paul says in 1 Corinthians 11:26, “For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until He comes.” But our adversaries contend that the Mass is a work that justifies us by the outward work (ex opere operato) and removes the guilt and liability to punishment in those for whom it is celebrated. That’s what Gabriel Biel writes.

[90/211] Anthony, Bernard, Dominic, Francis, and other Holy Fathers selected a certain kind of life either for the sake of study or other useful exercises. In the meantime, they believed that by faith they were counted righteous for Christ’s sake and that God was gracious to them, not because of their own exercises. But the multitude since then has imitated not the faith of the Fathers, but their example without faith. By such works the multitude thought they might merit forgiveness of sins, grace, and righteousness. They did not believe that they received these freely on account of Christ as the Atoning Sacrifice.

[91/212] The world judges that all works are an atonement by which God is appeased. They are a price by which we are counted righteous. It does not believe that Christ is the Atonement. It does not believe that through faith we are freely counted righteous for Christ’s sake. Since works cannot ease the conscience, other works are continually chosen, new rites are performed, new vows are made, and new orders of monks are formed beyond God’s command, in order that some great work may be sought that may be set against God’s wrath and judgment.
