# September 1

## Psalmody

1Clap your hands, all | peoples!* Shout to God with loud | songs of joy! 2For the LORD, the Most High, is | to be feared,* a great king over | all the earth. 3He subdued peoples | under us,* and nations un- | der our feet. 4He chose our heritage | for us,* the pride of Jacob | whom he loves. 5God has gone up | with a shout,* the LORD with the sound of a | trumpet. 6Sing praises to God, sing | praises!* Sing praises to our King, sing | praises! 7For God is the King of | all the earth;* sing praises | with a psalm! 8God reigns over the | nations;* God sits on his | holy throne. 9The princes of the peoples gather as the people of the God of | Abraham.* For the shields of the earth belong to God; he is highly ex- | alted!—Psalm 47
Additional Psalm: Psalm 8

## Old Testament Reading: 1 Kings 18:1–19

Elijah Confronts Ahab

1After many days the word of the LORD came to Elijah, in the third year, saying, “Go, show yourself to Ahab, and I will send rain upon the earth.” 2So Elijah went to show himself to Ahab. Now the famine was severe in Samaria. 3And Ahab called Obadiah, who was over the household. (Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly, 4and when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the LORD, Obadiah took a hundred prophets and hid them by fifties in a cave and fed them with bread and water.) 5And Ahab said to Obadiah, “Go through the land to all the springs of water and to all the valleys. Perhaps we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive, and not lose some of the animals.” 6So they divided the land between them to pass through it. Ahab went in one direction by himself, and Obadiah went in another direction by himself. 7And as Obadiah was on the way, behold, Elijah met him. And Obadiah recognized him and fell on his face and said, “Is it you, my lord Elijah?” 8And he answered him, “It is I. Go, tell your lord, ‘Behold, Elijah is here.’” 9And he said, “How have I sinned, that you would give your servant into the hand of Ahab, to kill me? 10As the LORD your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent to seek you. And when they would say, ‘He is not here,’ he would take an oath of the kingdom or nation, that they had not found you. 11And now you say, ‘Go, tell your lord, “Behold, Elijah is here.”’ 12And as soon as I have gone from you, the Spirit of the LORD will carry you I know not where. And so, when I come and tell Ahab and he cannot find you, he will kill me, although I your servant have feared the LORD from my youth. 13Has it not been told my lord what I did when Jezebel killed the prophets of the LORD, how I hid a hundred men of the LORD’s prophets by fifties in a cave and fed them with bread and water? 14And now you say, ‘Go, tell your lord, “Behold, Elijah is here”’; and he will kill me.” 15And Elijah said, “As the LORD of hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself to him today.” 16So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him. And Ahab went to meet Elijah. 17When Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab said to him, “Is it you, you troubler of Israel?” 18And he answered, “I have not troubled Israel, but you have, and your father’s house, because you have abandoned the commandments of the LORD and followed the Baals. 19Now therefore send and gather all Israel to me at Mount Carmel, and the 450 prophets of Baal and the 400 prophets of Asherah, who eat at Jezebel’s table.”

## New Testament Reading: Ephesians 1:1–23

Greeting

1Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To the saints who are in Ephesus, and are faithful in Christ Jesus: 2Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Spiritual Blessings in Christ

3Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places, 4even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him. In love 5he predestined us for adoption as sons through Jesus Christ, according to the purpose of his will, 6to the praise of his glorious grace, with which he has blessed us in the Beloved. 7In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace, 8which he lavished upon us, in all wisdom and insight 9making known to us the mystery of his will, according to his purpose, which he set forth in Christ 10as a plan for the fullness of time, to unite all things in him, things in heaven and things on earth. 11In him we have obtained an inheritance, having been predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his will, 12so that we who were the first to hope in Christ might be to the praise of his glory. 13In him you also, when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and believed in him, were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit, 14who is the guarantee of our inheritance until we acquire possession of it, to the praise of his glory.

Thanksgiving and Prayer

15For this reason, because I have heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love toward all the saints, 16I do not cease to give thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers, 17that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of him, 18having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope to which he has called you, what are the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints, 19and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the working of his great might 20that he worked in Christ when he raised him from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places, 21far above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age but also in the one to come. 22And he put all things under his feet and gave him as head over all things to the church, 23which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all.

## Writing

Joshua the son of Nun was the minister and successor of Moses, and the leader of the people of Israel who led them through the dry bed of the Jordan into the land of Canaan. He had the same name as our Savior, Jesus Christ [since in Hebrew “Joshua” and “Jesus” are the same name], and he was a type of Christ, who led the children of the promise of Abraham through the Jordan of this life’s troubles and of death into the restfulness of eternal life. … When Moses died, on the first day of the 2493rd year since the world’s creation, Joshua led the people of Israel into the land of Canaan, which was promised to their fathers. He won excellent and miraculous victories for God’s chosen ones. Having conquered the kings of Canaan, he distributed the land and finally died at the age of 110. In Hebrew his name is Yehoshua or Yosua, that is, “Savior,” “Helper.” In Greek his name is Iesous or Iesus.—David Chytraeus

## Hymnody

Lord Jesus, my salvation, My light, my life divine, My only consolation, O
make me wholly Thine! For Thou hast dearly bought me With blood and
bitter pain. Let me, since Thou hast sought me, Eternal life obtain.—Let
Me Be Thine Forever (LSB 689:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus Christ, Your servant Joshua led the children of Israel through the waters of the Jordan River into a land flowing with milk and honey. As our Joshua, lead us, we pray, through the waters of our Baptism into the promised land of our eternal home, where You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1083) Joshua Joshua, the son of Nun, of the tribe of Ephraim, is first mentioned in Exodus 17 when he was chosen by Moses to fight the Amalekites, whom he defeated in a brilliant military victory. He was placed in charge of the tent of meeting (Exodus 33:11) and was a member of the tribal representatives sent to survey the land of Canaan (Numbers 13:8). Later, he was appointed by God to succeed Moses as Israel’s commander-in-chief. Joshua eventually led the Israelites across the Jordan River into the Promised Land and directed the Israelites’ capture of Jericho. He is remembered especially for his final address to the Israelites, in which he challenged them to serve God faithfully (Joshua 24:1–27), concluding with the memorable words, “As for me and my household, we will serve the LORD” (24:15).

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession V (III) 213–222 [334–343]

[92/213] Contrary to Scripture, the adversaries uphold these godless opinions about works. They say these things about our works: they are an atonement, they merit forgiveness of sins and grace, and we are counted righteous before God by them (and not through faith, for Christ’s sake as the Atonement). What is this other than to deny Christ the honor of Mediator and Atoning Sacrifice?

[93/214] We believe and teach that good works must be done (fulfilling of the Law ought to follow faith). Nevertheless, we give Christ His own honor. We believe and teach that through faith, for Christ’s sake, we are counted righteous before God. We are not counted righteous because of works without Christ as Mediator. We do not merit forgiveness of sins, grace, and righteousness by works. We cannot set our works against God’s wrath and justice. Works cannot overcome the terrors of sin. But the terrors of sin are overcome through faith alone. Only Christ the Mediator is to be presented by faith against God’s wrath and judgment.

[94/215] If anyone thinks differently, he does not give Christ due honor. Christ has been set forth so that He might be an Atonement, that through Him we might have access to the Father.

[95/216] We are speaking now about the righteousness through which we approach God (not humans) but by which we receive grace and peace of conscience.

[96/217] Conscience, however, cannot be eased before God, unless through faith alone. Faith is certain that God for Christ’s sake is reconciled to us, according to Romans 5:1, “Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace.” This is because justification is only a matter freely promised for Christ’s sake. Therefore, it is always received before God through faith alone.

## [Passages the Adversaries Misuse]

[97/218] Now we will reply to those passages that the adversaries quote in order to prove that we are justified by love and works. From 1 Corinthians 13:2, they quote, “If I have all faith . . . but have not love, I am nothing.” Here they triumph greatly. Paul testifies to the entire Church (they say) that faith alone does not justify.

[98/219] But a reply is easy after we have shown above what we teach about love and works. This passage of Paul requires love. We also require this. For we have said above that renewal and beginning to fulfill the Law must exist in us, according to Jeremiah 31:33, “I will put My law within them, and I will write it on their hearts.” If anyone should cast away love, even though he has great faith, he does not keep his faith. For he does not keep the Holy Spirit.

[99/220] Nor indeed does Paul in this passage talk about the way of justification. Instead, he writes to those who, after they had been justified, should be urged to bring forth good fruit lest they lose the Holy Spirit.

[100/221] Furthermore, the adversaries treat the matter in a ridiculous way. They quote this one passage, in which Paul teaches about fruit. Yet they leave out many other passages in which he discusses the way of justification in a regular order. Besides, they always add a correction to the other passages that speak of faith, namely, that the passages ought to be understood as applying to “faith formed by love.” They add no correction that there is also need for faith, which believes we are counted righteous for Christ’s sake as the Atonement. So the adversaries exclude Christ from justification and teach only a righteousness of the Law.

[101/222] But let us return to Paul. No one can conclude anything more from this text than this: love is necessary. We confess this. It is also necessary not to steal. But the reasoning will not be correct if someone would put the argument like this: “Not to commit theft is necessary. Therefore, not to commit theft justifies.” Justification is not the approval of a particular work, but of the entire person. Therefore, this passage from Paul does not harm us. Only, the adversaries must not add to it whatever they please by imagination. Paul does not say that love justifies. He says, “I am nothing” [1 Corinthians 13:2]. In other words, faith—however great it may have been—is extinguished. He does not say that love overcomes the terrors of sin and of death, that we can set our love against God’s wrath and judgment, or that our love satisfies God’s Law. He does not say that we have access to God by our love without Christ as the Atoning Sacrifice, that we receive the promised forgiveness of sins by our love. Paul says nothing about this. He does not, therefore, think that love justifies, because we are justified only when we receive Christ as the Atoning Sacrifice and believe that for Christ’s sake God is reconciled to us. Neither is justification even to be dreamed of without Christ as the Atonement.
