# September 9

## Psalmody

1Hear my cry, | O God,* listen | to my prayer; 2from the end of the earth I call to you when my | heart is faint.* Lead me to the rock that is high- | er than I, 3for you have been my | refuge,* a strong tower against the | enemy. 4Let me dwell in your tent for- | ever!* Let me take refuge under the shelter | of your wings! 5For you, O God, have | heard my vows;* you have given me the heritage of those who | fear your name. 6Prolong the life | of the king;* may his years endure to all gener- | ations! 7May he be enthroned forever be- | fore God;* appoint steadfast love and faithfulness to watch | over him! 8So will I ever sing praises | to your name,* as I perform my vows day | after day.—Psalm 61
Additional Psalm: Psalm 59

## Old Testament Reading: 2 Kings 6:1–23

The Axe Head Recovered

1Now the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, “See, the place where we dwell under your charge is too small for us. 2Let us go to the Jordan and each of us get there a log, and let us make a place for us to dwell there.” And he answered, “Go.” 3Then one of them said, “Be pleased to go with your servants.” And he answered, “I will go.” 4So he went with them. And when they came to the Jordan, they cut down trees. 5But as one was felling a log, his axe head fell into the water, and he cried out, “Alas, my master! It was borrowed.” 6Then the man of God said, “Where did it fall?” When he showed him the place, he cut off a stick and threw it in there and made the iron float. 7And he said, “Take it up.” So he reached out his hand and took it.

Horses and Chariots of Fire

8Once when the king of Syria was warring against Israel, he took counsel with his servants, saying, “At such and such a place shall be my camp.” 9But the man of God sent word to the king of Israel, “Beware that you do not pass this place, for the Syrians are going down there.” 10And the king of Israel sent to the place about which the man of God told him. Thus he used to warn him, so that he saved himself there more than once or twice. 11And the mind of the king of Syria was greatly troubled because of this thing, and he called his servants and said to them, “Will you not show me who of us is for the king of Israel?” 12And one of his servants said, “None, my lord, O king; but Elisha, the prophet who is in Israel, tells the king of Israel the words that you speak in your bedroom.” 13And he said, “Go and see where he is, that I may send and seize him.” It was told him, “Behold, he is in Dothan.” 14So he sent there horses and chariots and a great army, and they came by night and surrounded the city. 15When the servant of the man of God rose early in the morning and went out, behold, an army with horses and chariots was all around the city. And the servant said, “Alas, my master! What shall we do?” 16He said, “Do not be afraid, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.” 17Then Elisha prayed and said, “O LORD, please open his eyes that he may see.” So the LORD opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw, and behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha. 18And when the Syrians came down against him, Elisha prayed to the LORD and said, “Please strike this people with blindness.” So he struck them with blindness in accordance with the prayer of Elisha. 19And Elisha said to them, “This is not the way, and this is not the city. Follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom you seek.” And he led them to Samaria. 20As soon as they entered Samaria, Elisha said, “O LORD, open the eyes of these men, that they may see.” So the LORD opened their eyes and they saw, and behold, they were in the midst of Samaria. 21As soon as the king of Israel saw them, he said to Elisha, “My father, shall I strike them down? Shall I strike them down?” 22He answered, “You shall not strike them down. Would you strike down those whom you have taken captive with your sword and with your bow? Set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink and go to their master.” 23So he prepared for them a great feast, and when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. And the Syrians did not come again on raids into the land of Israel. Additional Reading: 2 Kings 6:24–8:29

## New Testament Reading: Philippians 1:21–2:11

[To Live Is Christ]

21For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. 22If I am to live in the flesh, that means fruitful labor for me. Yet which I shall choose I cannot tell. 23I am hard pressed between the two. My desire is to depart and be with Christ, for that is far better. 24But to remain in the flesh is more necessary on your account. 25Convinced of this, I know that I will remain and continue with you all, for your progress and joy in the faith, 26so that in me you may have ample cause to glory in Christ Jesus, because of my coming to you again. 27Only let your manner of life be worthy of the gospel of Christ, so that whether I come and see you or am absent, I may hear of you that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one mind striving side by side for the faith of the gospel, 28and not frightened in anything by your opponents. This is a clear sign to them of their destruction, but of your salvation, and that from God. 29For it has been granted to you that for the sake of Christ you should not only believe in him but also suffer for his sake, 30engaged in the same conflict that you saw I had and now hear that I still have.

Christ’s Example of Humility

2:1So if there is any encouragement in Christ, any comfort from love, any partici-pation in the Spirit, any affection and sympathy, 2complete my joy by being of the same mind, having the same love, being in full accord and of one mind. 3Do nothing from rivalry or conceit, but in humility count others more significant than yourselves. 4Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others. 5Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, 6who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, 7but made himself nothing, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. 8And being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross. 9Therefore God has highly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name, 10so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

## Writing

[St. Peter said to Dante:] “Say, thou good Christian; manifest thyself; What is the Faith?” Whereat I raised my brow Unto that light wherefrom was this breathed forth. Then turned I round to Beatrice, and she Prompt signals made to me that I should pour The water forth from my internal fountain. “May grace, that suffers me to make confession,” Began I, “to the great centurion, Cause my conceptions all to be explicit!” And I continued: “As the truthful pen, Father, of thy dear brother wrote of it, Who put with thee Rome into the good way, Faith is the substance of the things we hope for, And evidence of those that are not seen; And this appears to me its quiddity [distinctive peculiarity].” Then heard I: “Very rightly thou perceivest, If well thou understandest why he placed it With substances and then with evidences.” And I thereafterward: “The things profound, That here vouchsafe to me their apparition, Unto all eyes below are so concealed, That they exist there only in belief, Upon [that] is founded the high hope, And hence it takes the nature of a substance. And it behoveth us from this belief To reason without having other sight, And hence it has the nature of evidence.” Then heard I: “If whatever is acquired Below by doctrine werethus understood, No sophist’s subtlety would there find place.”—Dante

## Hymnody

Lord, it belongs not to my care Whether I die or live; To love and serve
Thee is my share, And this Thy grace must give.—Lord, It Belongs Not to
My Care (LSB 757:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful Lord, You sent Your Son, Jesus, into our world to humble Himself by becoming obedient unto death, even death on a cross. Teach us to be obedient so that we might declare with St. Paul that “for to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain” (Philippians 1:21) and so that our lives may be worthy of the Gospel of Christ; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1089)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession VII–VIII (IV) 1–15
