# September 12

## Psalmody

12Blessèd is the man whom you discipline, | O LORD,* and whom you teach out | of your law, 13to give him rest from days of | trouble,* until a pit is dug for the | wicked. 14For the LORD will not forsake his | people;* he will not abandon his | heritage; 15for justice will return to the | righteous,* and all the upright in heart will | follow it.—Psalm 94:12–15
Additional Psalm: Psalm 94

## Old Testament Reading: 2 Chronicles 31:1–21

Hezekiah Organizes the Priests

1Now when all this was finished, all Israel who were present went out to the cities of Judah and broke in pieces the pillars and cut down the Asherim and broke down the high places and the altars throughout all Judah and Benjamin, and in Ephraim and Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the people of Israel returned to their cities, every man to his possession. 2And Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests and of the Levites, division by division, each according to his service, the priests and the Levites, for burnt offerings and peace offerings, to minister in the gates of the camp of the LORD and to give thanks and praise. 3The contribution of the king from his own possessions was for the burnt offerings: the burnt offerings of morning and evening, and the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the appointed feasts, as it is written in the Law of the LORD. 4And he commanded the people who lived in Jerusalem to give the portion due to the priests and the Levites, that they might give themselves to the Law of the LORD. 5As soon as the command was spread abroad, the people of Israel gave in abundance the firstfruits of grain, wine, oil, honey, and of all the produce of the field. And they brought in abundantly the tithe of everything. 6And the people of Israel and Judah who lived in the cities of Judah also brought in the tithe of cattle and sheep, and the tithe of the dedicated things that had been dedicated to the LORD their God, and laid them in heaps. 7In the third month they began to pile up the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month. 8When Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed the LORD and his people Israel. 9And Hezekiah questioned the priests and the Levites about the heaps. 10Azariah the chief priest, who was of the house of Zadok, answered him, “Since they began to bring the contributions into the house of the LORD, we have eaten and had enough and have plenty left, for the LORD has blessed his people, so that we have this large amount left.” 11Then Hezekiah commanded them to prepare chambers in the house of the LORD, and they prepared them. 12And they faithfully brought in the contributions, the tithes, and the dedicated things. The chief officer in charge of them was Conaniah the Levite, with Shimei his brother as second, 13while Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth, Jozabad, Eliel, Ismachiah, Mahath, and Benaiah were overseers assisting Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king and Azariah the chief officer of the house of God. 14And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, keeper of the east gate, was over the freewill offerings to God, to apportion the contribution reserved for the LORD and the most holy offerings. 15Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah were faithfully assisting him in the cities of the priests, to distribute the portions to their brothers, old and young alike, by divisions, 16except those enrolled by genealogy, males from three years old and upward—all who entered the house of the LORD as the duty of each day required—for their service according to their offices, by their divisions. 17The enrollment of the priests was according to their fathers’ houses; that of the Levites from twenty years old and upward was according to their offices, by their divisions. 18They were enrolled with all their little children, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, the whole assembly, for they were faithful in keeping themselves holy. 19And for the sons of Aaron, the priests, who were in the fields of common land belonging to their cities, there were men in the several cities who were designated by name to distribute portions to every male among the priests and to everyone among the Levites who was enrolled. 20Thus Hezekiah did throughout all Judah, and he did what was good and right and faithful before the LORD his God. 21And every work that he undertook in the service of the house of God and in accordance with the law and the commandments, seeking his God, he did with all his heart, and prospered.

## New Testament Reading: Philippians 4:1–23

1Therefore, my brothers, whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm thus in the Lord, my beloved. Exhortation, Encouragement, and Prayer 2I entreat Euodia and I entreat Syntyche to agree in the Lord. 3Yes, I ask you also, true companion, help these women, who have labored side by side with me in the gospel together with Clement and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life. 4Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, Rejoice. 5Let your reasonableness be known to everyone. The Lord is at hand; 6do not be anxious about anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God. 7And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus. 8Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if there is any excellence, if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things. 9What you have learned and received and heard and seen in me—Practice these things, and the God of peace will be with you.

God’s Provision

10I rejoiced in the Lord greatly that now at length you have revived your concern for me. You were indeed concerned for me, but you had no opportunity. 11Not that I am speaking of being in need, for I have learned in whatever situation I am to be content. 12I know how to be brought low, and I know how to abound. In any and every circumstance, I have learned the secret of facing plenty and hunger, abundance and need. 13I can do all things through him who strengthens me. 14Yet it was kind of you to share my trouble. 15And you Philippians yourselves know that in the beginning of the gospel, when I left Macedonia, no church entered into partnership with me in giving and receiving, except you only. 16Even in Thessalonica you sent me help for my needs once and again. 17Not that I seek the gift, but I seek the fruit that increases to your credit. 18I have received full payment, and more. I am well supplied, having received from Epaphroditus the gifts you sent, a fragrant offering, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to God. 19And my God will supply every need of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus. 20To our God and Father be glory forever and ever. Amen.

Final Greetings

21Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me greet you. 22All the saints greet you, especially those of Caesar’s household. 23The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.

## Writing

“Be cognizant, for the kingdom of God is near” (Luke 21:31). These words can refer either to the kingdom of God that we call the “advent of the Son,” for whose nativity we should be preparing just now, or to the kingdom of God we say is “paradise.” Either interpretation is truly and strictly acceptable, for the kingdom of glory is near to the servants of God, and the kingdom of grace, the advent of Christ, is already among them (Luke 17:21) and day by day grows and multiplies in His own servants. Thus, whichever way we interpret “kingdom of God,” we can say that this kingdom is a place or a reality of supreme majesty and therefore seeks out those of noble and reverential desires, for we read: “Surely His salvation is near those who fear Him, that His glory may dwell in our land” (Psalm 85:9). This kingdom has supreme clarity and therefore is among men of outstanding contemplation and meditation, inasmuch as “You are near, O Lord, and all Your ways are truth” (Psalm 119:151). This kingdom is incomparably charming and gentle, so that those who are near it, who have been created anew and anointed from heaven, exclaim: “Rejoice in the Lord always. I will say it again: Rejoice! Let your gentleness be evident to all. The Lord is near” (Philippians 4:4–5). The kingdom is, lastly, supremely holy and therefore encourages believers to be in regular conversation with God, for “the Lord is near to all who call on Him, to all who call on Him in truth” (Psalm 145:18).—Bonaventure

## Hymnody

Only Jesus can impart Balm to heal the wounded heart, Peace that flows
from sin forgiv’n, Joy that lifts the soul to heav’n, Faith and hope to walk
with God In the way that Enoch trod.—Chief of Sinners Though I Be (LSB
611:3)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, You have prepared for those who love You good things that surpass all understanding. Pour into our hearts such love toward You that we, loving You above all things, may obtain Your promises, which exceed all that we can desire; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (H65)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession VII–VIII (IV) 36–50

[36] The meaning is this: Righteousness of the heart is a spiritual matter, a matter of enlivening hearts. Clearly human traditions do not enliven hearts and are not effects of the Holy Spirit. Such efforts are love for one’s neighbor, self-control, and so on. They are not tools through which God moves hearts to believe, as are the divinely given Word and Sacraments. Rather, traditions are customs that have no connection to the heart. They perish with the using, and we must not believe that they are necessary for righteousness before God. To the same effect Paul says, “For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking but of righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit” (Romans 14:17).

[37] But there is no need to cite many testimonies. For they are everywhere clear in the Scriptures, and we have gathered many of them in the latter articles of our Confession. In this controversy the point to be decided must be repeated, namely, whether human traditions are acts of worship necessary for righteous-ness before God. In due course we will discuss this matter more fully.

[38] The adversaries say that universal traditions should be observed because they were supposedly handed down by the apostles. What religious men they are! They wish that the ceremonies received from the apostles be kept. Yet, they do not wish the apostles’ doctrine to be kept.

[39] They should judge these rites just as the apostles themselves judge them in their writings. For the apostles did not want us to believe that we are justified through such ceremonies, or that such ceremonies are necessary for righteousness before God. The apostles did not want to put such a burden upon consciences. They did not want to place righteousness and sin in the observance of days, food, and the like.

[40] Yes, Paul calls such opinions “teachings of demons” (1 Timothy 4:1). Therefore, the apostles’ will and advice should be taken from their writings. It is not enough to mention their example. The apostles observed certain days, not because this observance was necessary for justification, but in order that the people might know at what time they should gather. They observed also certain other ceremonies and orders of lessons whenever they gathered. The people kept the customs of the Fathers ‹from their Jewish festivals and ceremonies›. As is commonly the case, the apostles adapted to the history of the Gospel certain things, although somewhat changed. Among these things were the Passover and Pentecost. The apostles did this so that not only by teaching, but also through these examples, they might hand down to posterity the memory of the most important subjects.

[41] But if these things were handed down as necessary for justification, why, afterward, did the bishops change many things in these very matters? If they were matters of divine right, it was not lawful to change them by human authority.

[42] Before the Synod of Nicaea, some observed Easter at one time and others observed it at another time. Neither did this lack of uniformity harm faith. Afterward, the plan was adopted by which our Passover (Easter) did not fall at the same time as that of the Jewish Passover. The apostles had commanded the churches to observe the Passover with the brethren who had been converted from Judaism. Therefore, after the Synod of Nicaea, certain nations held firmly to the custom of observing the Jewish time. The apostles, by this decree, did not wish to put a demand upon the churches, as the words of the decree testify. For it asks no one to be troubled, even though his brothers and sisters, in observing Easter, do not change the time correctly. The words of the decree are found in Epiphanius:

Do not calculate, but celebrate it whenever your brethren of the circumcision do; celebrate it at the same time with them, and even though they may have erred, let not this be a care to you.

Epiphanius writes that these are the words presented in a decree about Easter. The wise reader can easily conclude from the decree that the apostles wished to free the people from the foolish opinion of a fixed time, to help them from being troubled, if a mistake should be made in setting the date.

[43] However, some in the East, who followed the teaching of Audians, argued that because of this decree of the apostles, the Passover should be observed with the Jews. In refuting them, Epiphanius praises the decree and says that it contains nothing that departs from the faith or rule of the Church. He blames the Audians because they do not correctly understand the expression. Epiphanius interprets it in the sense in which we interpret it, because the apostles thought it unimportant what time the Passover should be observed. Nevertheless, for harmony’s sake and because prominent brothers and sisters had been converted from the Jews, who observed their custom, the adversaries wished the rest to follow their example.

[44] They wisely warned the reader neither to remove the freedom of the Gospel, nor to burden consciences. The apostles thought that consciences should not be troubled, even though there should be an error in setting the date.

[45] Many things like this can be collected from the historical accounts. In them it appears that a lack of uniformity in human observances does not harm the unity of faith. What need is there of discussion? The adversaries do not at all understand what the righteousness of faith is, what Christ’s kingdom is. That is clear when they judge that uniformity of observances in food, days, clothing, and the like (which do not have God’s command) is necessary.

[46] Look at these religious men, our adversaries. They require uniform human observances for the unity of the Church. They do this even though they themselves have changed Christ’s ordinance in the use of the Supper, which certainly was a universal ordinance before. If universal ordinances are so necessary, why do they themselves change the ordinance of Christ’s Supper, which is not human, but divine? We will have to speak about this entire controversy a little later.

[47] Article VIII has been approved entirely, in which we confess that hypocrites and wicked persons have been mixed in with the Church and that the Sacraments are powerful even though given by wicked ministers. Ministers act in Christ’s place and do not represent their own persons, according to Luke, “The one who hears you hears Me” (10:16).

[48] Ungodly teachers are to be deserted because they no longer act in Christ’s place, but are antichrists. Christ says, “Beware of false prophets” (Matthew 7:15). Paul says, “If anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, let him be accursed” (Galatians 1:9).

[49] Furthermore, Christ has warned us concerning the Church in His parables. When offended by the private sins of priests or people, we should not stir up divisions, as the Donatists have wickedly done.

[50] However, concerning those who have stirred up division because they denied that priests are permitted to hold possessions and property, we hold that they are completely rebellious. To hold property is a civil ordinance. It is lawful, however, for Christians to use civil ordinances, just as they use the air, the light, food, and drink. For as this order of the world and fixed movements of the heavenly bodies are truly God’s ordinances and are preserved by God, so lawful governments are truly God’s ordinances, preserved and defended by God against the devil.
