# September 18

## Psalmody

5Out of my distress I called | on the LORD;* the LORD answered me and | set me free. 6The LORD is on my side; I | will not fear.* What can man | do to me? 7The LORD is on my side as my | helper;* I shall look in triumph on those who | hate me. 8It is better to take refuge | in the LORD * than to | trust in man. 9It is better to take refuge | in the LORD * than to trust in | princes. 10All nations sur- | rounded me;* in the name of the LORD I | cut them off! 11They surrounded me, surrounded meon | every side;* in the name of the LORD I | cut them off! 12They surrounded me like bees; they went out like a fire a- | mong thorns;* in the name of the LORD I | cut them off! 13I was pushed hard, so that I was | falling,* but the LORD | helped me. 14The LORD is my strength | and my song;* he has become my sal- | vation.
—Psalm 118:5–14
Additional Psalm: Psalm 118

## Old Testament Reading: Nehemiah 1:1–2:10

Report from Jerusalem

1The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah. Now it happened in the month of Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in Susa the capital, 2that Hanani, one of my brothers, came with certain men from Judah. And I asked them concerning the Jews who escaped, who had survived the exile, and concerning Jerusalem. 3And they said to me, “The remnant there in the province who had survived the exile is in great trouble and shame. The wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and its gates are destroyed by fire.”

Nehemiah’s Prayer

4As soon as I heard these words I sat down and wept and mourned for days, and I continued fasting and praying before the God of heaven. 5And I said, “O LORD God of heaven, the great and awesome God who keeps covenant and steadfast love with those who love him and keep his commandments, 6let your ear be attentive and your eyes open, to hear the prayer of your servant that I now pray before you day and night for the people of Israel your servants, confessing the sins of the people of Israel, which we have sinned against you. Even I and my father’s house have sinned. 7We have acted very corruptly against you and have not kept the commandments, the statutes, and the rules that you commanded your servant Moses. 8Remember the word that you commanded your servant Moses, saying, ‘If you are unfaithful, I will scatter you among the peoples, 9but if you return to me and keep my commandments and do them, though your outcasts are in the uttermost parts of heaven, from there I will gather them and bring them to the place that I have chosen, to make my name dwell there.’ 10They are your servants and your people, whom you have redeemed by your great power and by your strong hand. 11O Lord, let your ear be attentive to the prayer of your servant, and to the prayer of your servants who delight to fear your name, and give success to your servant today, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man.” Now I was cupbearer to the king.

Nehemiah Sent to Judah

2:1In the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes, when wine was before him, I took up the wine and gave it to the king. Now I had not been sad in his presence. 2And the king said to me, “Why is your face sad, seeing you are not sick? This is nothing but sadness of the heart.” Then I was very much afraid. 3I said to the king, “Let the king live forever! Why should not my face be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers’ graves, lies in ruins, and its gates have been destroyed by fire?” 4Then the king said to me, “What are you requesting?” So I prayed to the God of heaven. 5And I said to the king, “If it pleases the king, and if your servant has found favor in your sight, that you send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers’ graves, that I may rebuild it.” 6And the king said to me (the queen sitting beside him), “How long will you be gone, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send me when I had given him a time. 7And I said to the king, “If it pleases the king, let letters be given me to the governors of the province Beyond the River, that they may let me pass through until I come to Judah, 8and a letter to Asaph, the keeper of the king’s forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the fortress of the temple, and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall occupy.” And the king granted me what I asked, for the good hand of my God was upon me.

Nehemiah Inspects Jerusalem’s Walls

9Then I came to the governors of the province Beyond the River and gave them the king’s letters. Now the king had sent with me officers of the army and horsemen. 10But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite servant heard this, it displeased them greatly that someone had come to seek the welfare of the people of Israel. Additional Reading: Haggai 1:1–2:23

## New Testament Reading: 1 Timothy 1:1–20

Greeting

1Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope, 2To Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

Warning Against False Teachers

3As I urged you when I was going to Macedonia, remain at Ephesus so that you may charge certain persons not to teach any different doctrine, 4nor to devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies, which promote speculations rather than the stewardship from God that is by faith. 5The aim of our charge is love that issues from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith. 6Certain persons, by swerving from these, have wandered away into vain discussion, 7desiring to be teachers of the law, without understanding either what they are saying or the things about which they make confident assertions. 8Now we know that the law is good, if one uses it lawfully, 9understanding this, that the law is not laid down for the just but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who strike their fathers and mothers, for murderers, 10the sexually immoral, men who practice homosexuality, enslavers, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is contrary to sound doctrine, 11in accordance with the gospel of the glory of the blessed God with which I have been entrusted.

Christ Jesus Came to Save Sinners

12I thank him who has given me strength, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he judged me faithful, appointing me to his service, 13though formerly I was a blasphemer, persecutor, and insolent opponent. But I received mercy because I had acted ignorantly in unbelief, 14and the grace of our Lord overflowed for me with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus. 15The saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the foremost. 16But I received mercy for this reason, that in me, as the foremost, Jesus Christ might display his perfect patience as an example to those who were to believe in him for eternal life. 17To the King of ages, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen. 18This charge I entrust to you, Timothy, my child, in accordance with the prophecies previously made about you, that by them you may wage the good warfare, 19holding faith and a good conscience. By rejecting this, some have made shipwreck of their faith, 20among whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan that they may learn not to blaspheme.

## Writing

“O Timothy, keep the deposit, shunning profane novelties of words and oppositions of the knowledge falsely so called, which some professing have erred concerning the faith” [1 Timothy 6:20]. After words such as these, is there anyone of so hardened a front, such anvil-like impudence, such adamantine pertinacity, as not to succumb to so huge a mass, not to be crushed by so ponderous a weight, not to be shaken in pieces by such heavy blows, not to be annihilated by such dreadful thunderbolts of divine eloquence? “Shun profane novelties,” he says. He does not say shun “antiquity.” But he plainly points to what ought to follow by the rule of contrary. For if novelty is to be shunned, antiquity is to be held fast; if novelty is profane, antiquity is sacred. He adds, “And oppositions of science falsely so called.” “Falsely called” indeed, as applied to the doctrines of heretics, where ignorance is disguised under the name of knowledge, fog of sunshine, darkness of light.—Vincent of Lérins

## Hymnody

I trust in Him with all my heart; Now all my sorrow ceases. His words
abiding peace impart; His blood from guilt releases. Free grace through
Him I now obtain; He washes me from ev’ry stain, And pure I stand before
Him.—If Your Beloved Son, O God (LSB 568:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, our heavenly Father, whose nature it is always to have mercy, visit with Your fatherly correction all who have erred and gone astray from the truth of Your holy Word, and bring them to a true sense of their error that they may again receive and hold fast Your unchangeable truth; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (114)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIIa (V) 46–58

[46] When Paul describes conversion or renewal, he almost everywhere designates these two parts, making dead and making alive, as in Colossians 2:11, “In Him also you were circumcised with a circumcision made without hands,” namely, “by putting off the body of the flesh.” And afterward, “in which you were also raised with Him through faith in the powerful working of God” (2:12). Here are the two parts. One is putting off the body of sins, the other is the rising again through faith. Neither should these terms “making dead,” “making alive,” “putting off the body of sins,” “rising again” be understood in a Platonic way, about a fake change. Rather, “making dead” means true terrors, such as those of the dying, which nature could not sustain unless it were supported by faith. Paul calls that “the putting off the body of sins,” which we ordinarily call contrition. In these griefs the natural, lustful desire is purged away. The “making alive” should not be understood as a Platonic fancy, but as comfort that truly sustains life that flickers in contrition.

[47] Here, therefore, are two parts: contrition and faith. For conscience cannot be quieted except through faith. Therefore, faith alone makes alive, according to this declaration: “The righteous shall live by his faith” (Habakkuk 2:4; Romans 1:17).

[48] Colossians 2:14 says, “[Christ canceled] the record of debt that stood against us with its legal demands.” Here also there are two parts, the handwriting and the blotting out of the handwriting. The handwriting, however, is conscience, convicting and condemning us. The Law, furthermore, is the Word that rebukes and condemns sins. Therefore, this voice that says, “I have sinned against the LORD,” as David says (2 Samuel 12:13), is the handwriting. Wicked and secure people do not seriously give forth this voice, for they do not see. They do not read the sentence of the Law written in the heart. This sentence is perceived in true griefs and terrors. Therefore, the handwriting that condemns us is contrition itself. To blot out the handwriting is to chisel away the sentence by which we declare that we shall be condemned and to engrave the sentence by which we know that we have been freed from this condemnation. Faith is the new sentence. It reverses the former sentence and gives peace and life to the heart.

[49] What need is there to cite many testimonies since they are everywhere clear in the Scriptures?

The LORD has disciplined me severely, but He has not given me over to death. (Psalm 118:18)

My soul melts away for sorrow; strengthen me according to Your word! (Psalm 119:28)

Here, contrition is contained in the first clause, and how we are revived in contrition is clearly described in the second. We are revived by God’s Word, which offers grace.

[50] This sustains and enlivens hearts.

The LORD kills and brings to life; He brings down to Sheol and raises up. (1 Samuel 2:6)

Contrition is meant by one of these; faith is meant by the other.

[51] [The LORD] will be roused; to do His deed—strange is His deed! and to work His work—alien is His work! (Isaiah 28:21)

He calls it the “strange” work of the Lord when He terrifies, because to make alive and comfort is God’s own proper work. But He terrifies, Isaiah says, for this reason—that there may be a place for comfort and making alive. For hearts that are secure and do not feel God’s wrath hate consolation.

[52] In this manner Scripture is accustomed to join these two, the terrors and the consolation. It does this to teach that there are these chief parts in repentance: contrition and faith that comforts and justifies. Neither do we see how the nature of repentance can be presented more clearly and simply.

[53] God’s two chief works among people are these: to terrify; to justify and make alive those who have been terrified. Into these two works all Scripture has been distributed. The one part is the Law, which shows, reproves, and condemns sins. The other part is the Gospel, that is, the promise of grace bestowed in Christ. This promise is constantly repeated in the whole of Scripture, first having been delivered to Adam ‹“I will put enmity” in Genesis 3:15›, afterward, to the patriarchs. Then, it was still more clearly proclaimed by the prophets. Lastly, it was preached and set forth among the Jewish people by Christ and then spread out over the entire world by the apostles.

[54] All the saints were justified through faith in this promise, and not by their own attrition or contrition.

[55] The examples also show these two parts. After his sin, Adam is rebuked and becomes terrified; this was contrition. Then, God promises grace and speaks of a future seed (the blessed seed, that is, Christ) by which the devil’s kingdom, death, and sin will be destroyed [Genesis 3:15]. There He offers the forgiveness of sins. These are the chief things. For although the punishment is added afterward, it does not merit the forgiveness of sin. We will speak about this kind of punishment a little later.

[56] David is rebuked by Nathan in this way. Terrified, he says, “I have sinned against the LORD” (2 Samuel 12:13). This is contrition. Afterward, he hears the Absolution, “The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die.” This voice encourages David, and through faith it sustains, justifies, and enlivens him. A punishment is also added, but this punishment does not merit the forgiveness of sins.

[57] Nor are special punishments always added. In repentance these two things ought always to exist, namely, contrition and faith, as in Luke 7. The woman, who was a sinner, came to Christ weeping. By these tears the contrition is recognized. Afterward, she hears the Absolution, “Your sins are forgiven. Your faith has saved you; go in peace” (vv. 48, 50). This is the second part of repentance, namely, faith that encourages and comforts her.

[58] From all these it is clear to godly readers that we assign to repentance those parts that properly belong to it in conversion, or the new birth, and the forgiveness of sin. Worthy fruit and punishments follow rebirth and the forgiveness of sin. For this reason we have mentioned these two parts so that the faith required in repentance might be seen better, and so that faith, which the Gospel proclaims, can be better understood when it is contrasted with contrition and making dead.
