# September 14

## Psalmody

6I am utterly bowed down and | prostrate;* all the day I go about | mourning. 7For my sides are filled with | burning,* and there is no soundness | in my flesh. 8I am feeble | and crushed;* I groan because of the tumult | of my heart. 9O Lord, all my longing is be- | fore you;* my sighing is not hid- | den from you. 10My heart throbs; my strength | fails me,* and the light of my eyes—it also has | gone from me. 11My friends and companions standaloof | from my plague,* and my nearest kin stand | far off. 12Those who seek my life lay their snares; those who seek my hurt speak of | ruin* and meditate treachery | all day long. 13But I am like a deaf man; I | do not hear,* like a mute man who does not o- | pen his mouth. 14I have become like a man who | does not hear,* and in whose mouth are | no rebukes. 15But for you, O LORD, | do I wait;* it is you, O Lord my God, who will | answer. 16For I said, “Only let them not rejoice | over me,* who boast against me when my | foot slips!”—Psalm 38:6–16
Additional Psalm: Psalm 38

## Old Testament Reading: 2 Chronicles 33:1–25

Manasseh Reigns in Judah

1Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem. 2And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to the abominations of the nations whom the LORD drove out before the people of Israel. 3For he rebuilt the high places that his father Hezekiah had broken down, and he erected altars to the Baals, and made Asherahs, and worshiped all the host of heaven and served them. 4And he built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD had said, “In Jerusalem shall my name be forever.” 5And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD. 6And he burned his sons as an offering in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, and used fortune-telling and omens and sorcery, and dealt with mediums and with necromancers. He did much evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking him to anger. 7And the carved image of the idol that he had made he set in the house of God, of which God said to David and to Solomon his son, “In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever, 8and I will no more remove the foot of Israel from the land that I appointed for your fathers, if only they will be careful to do all that I have commanded them, all the law, the statutes, and the rules given through Moses.” 9Manasseh led Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem astray, to do more evil than the nations whom the LORD destroyed before the people of Israel.

Manasseh’s Repentance

10The LORD spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they paid no attention. 11Therefore the LORD brought upon them the commanders of the army of the king of Assyria, who captured Manasseh with hooks and bound him with chains of bronze and brought him to Babylon. 12And when he was in distress, he entreated the favor of the LORD his God and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. 13He prayed to him, and God was moved by his entreaty and heard his plea and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the LORD was God. 14Afterward he built an outer wall for the city of David west of Gihon, in the valley, and for the entrance into the Fish Gate, and carried it around Ophel, and raised it to a very great height. He also put commanders of the army in all the fortified cities in Judah. 15And he took away the foreign gods and the idol from the house of the LORD, and all the altars that he had built on the mountain of the house of the LORD and in Jerusalem, and he threw them outside of the city. 16He also restored the altar of the LORD and offered on it sacrifices of peace offerings and of thanksgiving, and he commanded Judah to serve the LORD, the God of Israel. 17Nevertheless, the people still sacrificed at the high places, but only to the LORD their God. 18Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of the LORD, the God of Israel, behold, they are in the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel. 19And his prayer, and how God was moved by his entreaty, and all his sin and his faithlessness, and the sites on which he built high places and set up the Asherim and the images, before he humbled himself, behold, they are written in the Chronicles of the Seers. 20So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his house, and Amon his son reigned in his place.

Amon’s Reign and Death

21Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. 22And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, as Manasseh his father had done. Amon sacrificed to all the images that Manasseh his father had made, and served them. 23And he did not humble himself before the LORD, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself, but this Amon incurred guilt more and more. 24And his servants conspired against him and put him to death in his house. 25But the people of the land struck down all those who had conspired against King Amon. And the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his place. Additional Reading: Jonah 1:1–4:11

## New Testament Reading: Colossians 1:24–2:7

Paul’s Ministry to the Church

24Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh I am filling up what is lacking in Christ’s afflictions for the sake of his body, that is, the church, 25of which I became a minister according to the stewardship from God that was given to me for you, to make the word of God fully known, 26the mystery hidden for ages and generations but now revealed to his saints. 27To them God chose to make known how great among the Gentiles are the riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. 28Him we proclaim, warning everyone and teaching everyone with all wisdom, that we may present everyone mature in Christ. 29For this I toil, struggling with all his energy that he powerfully works within me. 2:1For I want you to know how great a struggle I have for you and for those at Laodicea and for all who have not seen me face to face, 2that their hearts may be encouraged, being knit together in love, to reach all the riches of full assurance of understanding and the knowledge of God’s mystery, which is Christ, 3in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 4I say this in order that no one may delude you with plausible arguments. 5For though I am absent in body, yet I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your good order and the firmness of your faith in Christ.

Alive in Christ

6Therefore, as you received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, 7rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as you were taught, abounding in thanksgiving.

## Writing

The children of Israel, whenever they turned to repentance, remembered above all their exodus from Egypt, and remembering turned back to God who had brought them out. Moses impressed this memory and this protection upon them many times, and David afterwards did the same. How much more ought we to remember our exodus from Egypt, and by this remembrance turn back to him who led us through the washing of regeneration [Titus 3:5], remembrance of which is commended to us for this very reason! This can be done most fittingly in the sacrament of bread and wine… Thus you see how rich a Christian is, that is, one who has been baptized! Even if he would, he could not lose his salvation, however much he sinned, unless he refused to believe. For no sin can condemn him save unbelief alone. All other sins, so long as the faith in God’s promise made in baptism returns or remains, are immediately blotted out through that same faith, or rather through the truth of God, because he cannot deny himself if you confess him and faithfully cling to him in his promise.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

Once far off but now invited, We approach Your sacred throne, In Your
covenant united, Reconciled, redeemed, made one. Now revealed to eastern
sages, See the Star of Mercy shine, Myst’ry hid in former ages, Myst’ry
great of love divine.—Hail, O Source of Every Blessing (LSB 409:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful God, Your Son, Jesus Christ, was lifted high upon the cross that He might bear the sins of the world and draw all people to Himself. Grant that we who glory in His death for our redemption may faithfully heed His call to bear the cross and follow Him, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F27) Holy Cross Day One of the earliest annual celebrations of the Church, Holy Cross Day traditionally commemorated the discovery of the original cross of Jesus on September 14, 320, in Jerusalem. The cross was found by Helena, mother of Roman Emperor Constantine the Great. In conjunction with the dedication of a basilica at the site of Jesus’ crucifixion and resurrection, the festival day was made official by order of Constantine in AD 335. A devout Christian, Helena had helped locate and authenticate many sites related to the life, ministry, death, and resurrection of Jesus throughout biblical lands. Holy Cross Day has remained popular in both Eastern and Western Christianity. Many Lutheran parishes have chosen to use “Holy Cross” as the name of their congregation.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XI 60–67

[60] Concerning the time, certainly most people in our churches frequently use the Sacraments (Absolution and the Lord’s Supper) during the year. Those who teach about the worth and fruit of the Sacraments speak in a way that invites the people to use the Sacraments frequently. There are many writings by our theologians about this subject that the adversaries, if they are good men, will undoubtedly approve and praise.

[61] Excommunication is also pronounced against the openly wicked and the haters of the Sacraments. These things are done both according to the Gospel and according to the old canons.

[62] A fixed time for Confession is not prescribed because all are not ready in the same way at the same time. Yes, if all were to come at the same time, they could not be heard and instructed in order. The old canons and Fathers do not appoint a fixed time. The canon speaks only in this way:

If any enter the Church and be found never to commune, let them be taught that, if they do not commune, they come to repentance. If they commune ‹if they wish to be regarded as Christians›, let them not be thrown out; if they fail to do so, let them be excommunicated.

Christ [Paul] says that those who eat unworthily eat judgment to themselves (1 Corinthians 11:29). So the pastors do not force those who are not qualified to use the Sacraments.

[63] Concerning the enumeration of sins in Confession, people are taught in such a way as not to trap their consciences. It is helpful to familiarize inexperienced people, to name some things, in order that they may be more readily taught. We are now discussing what is necessary according to divine Law. Therefore, the adversaries should not quote for us the regulation Omnis utriusque, which we already know, but they should show from the divine Law that complete naming of sins is necessary for obtaining their forgiveness.

[64] The entire Church, throughout all Europe, knows what sort of snares this point of the regulation has cast upon consciences by commanding that all sins be confessed. The matter was only made worse by the Summists, who collected the circumstances of the sins and added their own ideas. What mazes there were! How great a torture for the best minds! The immoral and ungodly were in no way moved by these instruments of terror.

[65] Afterward, what tragedies did the questions about one’s own priest stir up among the pastors and brethren, who then were by no means brethren when they were warring about jurisdiction of confessions! We believe that, according to divine Law, a complete listing of sins is not necessary. This is also pleasing to Panormitanus and very many other learned legal scholars. Nor do we want to burden the consciences of our people by the regulation Omnis utriusque. We judge it to be like any other human tradition. They are not acts of worship necessary for justification. This regulation commands that we do something impossible—that we should confess all sins. However, it is clear that most sins we neither remember nor understand, according to Psalm 19:12, “Who can discern his errors?”

[66] If the pastors are good men, they will know to what extent they should examine inexperienced persons. But we do not want to sanction the torture of the Summists. It would have been more tolerable if they had added one word about faith, which comforts and encourages consciences. About this faith, which obtains the forgiveness of sins, there is not a syllable in so great a mass of regulations, commentaries, summaries, or books of confession. Christ is nowhere read there. Only the lists of sins are read. The greater part is occupied with sins against human traditions.

[67] This is most useless. This doctrine has forced many to despair. Godly minds were not able to find rest because they believed that by divine Law listing was necessary. Yet they experienced that it was impossible. Other faults of no less importance cling to the doctrine of the adversaries about repentance, which we will now recount.
