# September 11

## Psalmody

1O God, we have heard with our ears, our fathers have | told us,* what deeds you performed in their days, in the | days of old: 2you with your own hand drove out the nations, but them you | planted;* you afflicted the peoples, but them you | set free; 3for not by their own sword did they win the land, nor did their own arm | save them,* but your right hand and your arm, and the light of your face, for you de- | lighted in them. 4You are my King, | O God;* ordain salvation for | Jacob! 5Through you we push | down our foes;* through your name we tread down those who rise up a- | gainst us. 6For not in my bow | do I trust,* nor can my sword | save me. 7But you have saved us | from our foes* and have put to shame those who | hate us. 8In God we have boasted con- | tinually,* and we will give thanks to your name for- | ever.—Psalm 44:1–8
Additional Psalm: Psalm 100

## Old Testament Reading: 2 Chronicles 29:1–24

Hezekiah Reigns in Judah

1Hezekiah began to reign when he was twenty-five years old, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abijah the daughter of Zechariah. 2And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.

Hezekiah Cleanses the Temple

3In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of the house of the LORD and repaired them. 4He brought in the priests and the Levites and assembled them in the square on the east 5and said to them, “Hear me, Levites! Now consecrate yourselves, and consecrate the house of the LORD, the God of your fathers, and carry out the filth from the Holy Place. 6For our fathers have been unfaithful and have done what was evil in the sight of the LORD our God. They have forsaken him and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the LORD and turned their backs. 7They also shut the doors of the vestibule and put out the lamps and have not burned incense or offered burnt offerings in the Holy Place to the God of Israel. 8Therefore the wrath of the LORD came on Judah and Jerusalem, and he has made them an object of horror, of astonishment, and of hissing, as you see with your own eyes. 9For behold, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this. 10Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with the LORD, the God of Israel, in order that his fierce anger may turn away from us. 11My sons, do not now be negligent, for the LORD has chosen you to stand in his presence, to minister to him and to be his ministers and make offerings to him.” 12Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites; and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehallelel; and of the Gershonites, Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah; 13and of the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeuel; and of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah; 14and of the sons of Heman, Jehuel and Shimei; and of the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel. 15They gathered their brothers and consecrated themselves and went in as the king had commanded, by the words of the LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD. 16The priests went into the inner part of the house of the LORD to cleanse it, and they brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the LORD into the court of the house of the Lord. And the Levites took it and carried it out to the brook Kidron. 17They began to consecrate on the first day of the first month, and on the eighth day of the month they came to the vestibule of the LORD. Then for eight days they consecrated the house of the LORD, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they finished. 18Then they went in to Hezekiah the king and said, “We have cleansed all the house of the LORD, the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the table for the showbread and all its utensils. 19All the utensils that King Ahaz discarded in his reign when he was faithless, we have made ready and consecrated, and behold, they are before the altar of the LORD.”

Hezekiah Restores Temple Worship

20Then Hezekiah the king rose early and gathered the officials of the city and went up to the house of the LORD. 21And they brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven male goats for a sin offering for the kingdom and for the sanctuary and for Judah. And he commanded the priests, the sons of Aaron, to offer them on the altar of the LORD. 22So they slaughtered the bulls, and the priests received the blood and threw it against the altar. And they slaughtered the rams, and their blood was thrown against the altar. And they slaughtered the lambs, and their blood was thrown against the altar. 23Then the goats for the sin offering were brought to the king and the assembly, and they laid their hands on them, 24and the priests slaughtered them and made a sin offering with their blood on the altar, to make atonement for all Israel. For the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.

## New Testament Reading: Philippians 3:1–21

Righteousness Through Faith in Christ

1Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you is no trouble to me and is safe for you. 2Look out for the dogs, look out for the evildoers, look out for those who mutilate the flesh. 3For we are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God and glory in Christ Jesus and put no confidence in the flesh—4though I myself have reason for confidence in the flesh also. If anyone else thinks he has reason for confidence in the flesh, I have more: 5circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as to the law, a Pharisee; 6as to zeal, a persecutor of the church; as to righteousness under the law, blameless. 7But whatever gain I had, I counted as loss for the sake of Christ. 8Indeed, I count everything as loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as rubbish, in order that I may gain Christ 9and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which comes through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God that depends on faith—10that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, 11that by any means possible I may attain the resurrection from the dead.

Straining Toward the Goal

12Not that I have already obtained this or am already perfect, but I press on to make it my own, because Christ Jesus has made me his own. 13Brothers, I do not consider that I have made it my own. But one thing I do: forgetting what lies behind and straining forward to what lies ahead, 14I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus. 15Let those of us who are mature think this way, and if in anything you think otherwise, God will reveal that also to you. 16Only let us hold true to what we have attained. 17Brothers, join in imitating me, and keep your eyes on those who walk according to the example you have in us. 18For many, of whom I have often told you and now tell you even with tears, walk as enemies of the cross of Christ. 19Their end is destruction, their god is their belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things. 20But our citizenship is in heaven, and from it we await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, 21who will transform our lowly body to be like his glorious body, by the power that enables him even to subject all things to himself.

## Writing

In conclusion the psalmist states that despite the insignificance of the clouds and God’s Christians to the world they are nonetheless a wonder to behold in view of God’s immanence in them and His rule over them. Everyone, therefore, really ought to stand in awe of them and honor them, since they form God’s holy dwelling place. For the word “saints” refers to a holy place and dwelling here. The holy Christians make up the holy dwelling place of God in the New Testament, where God is no longer confined to cities and buildings as He was in the Old Testament. These Christians are sanctified far more perfectly than Solomon’s temple, sanctified with the Holy Spirit Himself, and anointed with the living oil of God’s grace. Whoever touches them also touches the apple of God’s eye (Zech. 2:8). This assurance is given us to console and fortify us in the days of persecution. Whatever persecution is visited on us, whom they despise, is really inflicted on God, who will deal terribly with them. The appellation “the God of Israel” signifies that our God is none other than the one whom the Israelites once had. It is Christ, whom the Israelites once possessed and of whom we now also say: He who does these things is no longer only Israel’s God but the God of the whole world. Nobody is strong in his own might; no one has the strength for successful resistance to evil. It is God alone who vouchsafes power and strength to all, namely, to all who are powerful and strong, so that He alone is blessed and He alone is God. That is the meaning of “Blessed be God!” Or, as St. Paul says (2 Cor. 10:17): “Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord!” Amen.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

When I survey the wondrous cross On which the Prince of Glory died, My
richest gain I count but loss And pour contempt on all my pride.—When I
Survey the Wondrous Cross (LSB 425:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Most merciful Father, with compassion You hear the cries of Your people in great distress. Be with all who now endure affliction and calamity, bless the work of those who bring rescue and relief, and enable us to aid and comfort those who are suffering that they may find renewed hope and purpose; through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F41)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession VII–VIII (IV) 25–35

[25] Now, if we would define the Church in this way, we would perhaps have fairer judges. For there exist many excessive and wicked writings about the pope of Rome’s power, for which no one has ever been charged. We alone are blamed, because we proclaim Christ’s graciousness, that by faith in Christ we obtain forgiveness of sins, and not by worship ceremonies created by the pope.

[26] Furthermore, Christ, the prophets, and the apostles define Christ’s Church very different than the papal kingdom.

[27] Neither must we transfer to the popes what belongs to the true Church (as though the popes are pillars of the truth who do not err). How many of the popes care for the Gospel or judge that it is worth being read? Many ‹in Italy and elsewhere› even publicly ridicule all religions. Or, if they approve anything, they approve only things that are in harmony with human reason. They regard the rest like fables and like the tragedies of the poets.

[28] According to the Scriptures, we hold that the Church, properly called, is the congregation of saints who truly believe Christ’s Gospel and have the Holy Spirit. We confess that in this life many hypocrites and wicked people are mixed in with these. They have the fellowship in outward signs, are members of the Church according to this fellowship in outward signs, and so hold offices in the Church (preach, administer the Sacraments, and bear the title and name of Christians). However, the fact that the Sacraments are administered by the unworthy does not detract from the Sacraments’ power. Because of the call of the Church, the unworthy still represent the person of Christ and do not represent their own persons, as Christ testifies, “The one who hears you hears Me” (Luke 10:16). (Even Judas was sent to preach.) When they offer God’s Word, when they offer the Sacraments, they offer them in the stead and place of Christ. Those words of Christ teach us not to be offended by the unworthiness of the ministers.

[29] In the Confession, we said clearly enough that we condemn the Donatists and Wycliffites. They thought that people sinned when they received the Sacraments from the unworthy in the Church. These points seem, for the present, to be enough for the defense of our description of the Church. Neither do we see how, when the Church, properly called, is named the body of Christ, it should be described differently than we have described it. For it is clear that the wicked belong to the devil’s kingdom and body. He drives them on and holds them captive. Such things are clearer than the light of noonday. However, if the adversaries continue to pervert them, we will not hesitate to reply at greater length.

[30] The adversaries also condemn the part of Article VII in which we said that “for the true unity of the Church it is enough to agree about the doctrine of the Gospel and the administration of the Sacraments. It is not necessary that human traditions, that is, rites or ceremonies instituted by men, should be the same everywhere.” Here they distinguish between universal and particular rites. They approve our article if it is understood concerning particular rites; they do not approve it concerning universal rites.

[31] We do not completely understand what the adversaries mean. We are speaking of true, spiritual unity. Without faith in the heart, or righteousness of heart before God, such unity cannot exist. Similarity of human ceremonies, whether universal or particular, is not necessary. The righteousness of faith is not a righteousness bound to certain traditions. The righteousness of the Law was bound to the Mosaic ceremonies. But righteousness of the heart is a matter that enlivens the heart. Human traditions, whether they are universal or particular, contribute nothing to this new life. Neither are traditions effects of the Holy Spirit, as are self-control, patience, the fear of God, love for one’s neighbor, and the works of love.

[32] The reasons why we presented this article were not small. Clearly many foolish opinions about traditions had crept into the Church. Some thought that human traditions were necessary services for earning justification. Afterward, they argued how God came to be worshiped with such variety, as though these observances were acts of worship and not outward and political ordinances. Such ordinances have no connection with the righteousness of heart or the worship of God. These ordinances vary, according to the circumstances, for certain probable reasons, sometimes in one way, and at other times in another. Likewise, some churches have excommunicated others because of such traditions as the observance of Easter, icons, and the like. So the ignorant have imagined that faith (or the righteousness of the heart before God) cannot exist without these ceremonies. Many foolish writings of the Summists and of others exist on this matter.

[33] We believe that the true unity of the Church is not injured by dissimilar ceremonies instituted by humans, just as the dissimilar length of day and night does not injure the unity of the Church. However, it is pleasing to us that, for the sake of peace, universal ceremonies are kept. We also willingly keep the order of the Mass in the churches, the Lord’s Day, and other more famous festival days. With a very grateful mind we include the beneficial and ancient ordinances, especially since they contain a discipline. This discipline is beneficial for educating and training the people and those who are ignorant ‹the young people›.

[34] We are not discussing now whether it is helpful to keep them because of peace or bodily profit. We speak of something else. The question at hand is whether the observances of human traditions are acts of worship necessary for righteousness before God. This is the point to be judged in this controversy. When this is decided, it can be judged later whether it is necessary that human traditions should everywhere be the same for the true unity of the Church. For if human traditions are not acts of worship necessary for righteousness before God, it follows that those not having the traditions received elsewhere can be righteous and the sons of God as well. For example, if the style of German clothing is not worship of God and necessary for righteousness before God, it follows that people can be righteous and God’s sons, and Christ’s Church, even though they use a costume that is not German, but French.

Paul clearly teaches this to the Colossians:

[35] Therefore let no one pass judgment on you in questions of food and drink, or with regard to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath. These are a shadow of the things to come, but the substance belongs to Christ. (2:16–17)

Likewise:

If with Christ you died to the elemental spirits of the world, why, as if you were still alive in the world, do you submit to regulations—“Do not handle, Do not taste, Do not touch” (referring to things that all perish as they are used)—according to human precepts and teachings? These have indeed an appearance of wisdom in promoting self-made religion and asceticism. (2:20–23)
