# September 27

## Psalmody

9Because you have made the LORD your | dwelling place—* the Most High, who is my | refuge—10no evil shall be allowed to be- | fall you,* no plague come | near your tent. 11For he will command his angelscon- | cerning you* to guard you in | all your ways. 12On their hands they will | bear you up,* lest you strike your foot a- | gainst a stone. 13You will tread on the lion and the | adder;* the young lion and the serpent you will trample | underfoot. 14“Because he holds fast to me in love, I will de- | liver him;* I will protect him, because he | knows my name. 15When he calls to me, I will answer him; I will be with him in | trouble;* I will rescue him and | honor him. 16With long life I will sat- | isfy him* and show him my sal- | vation.”—Psalm 91:9–16
Additional Psalm: Psalm 91

## Old Testament Reading: Malachi 3:6–4:6

Robbing God

6“For I the LORD do not change; therefore you, O children of Jacob, are not consumed. 7From the days of your fathers you have turned aside from my statutes and have not kept them. Return to me, and I will return to you, says the LORD of hosts. But you say, ‘How shall we return?’ 8Will man rob God? Yet you are robbing me. But you say, ‘How have we robbed you?’ In your tithes and contributions. 9You are cursed with a curse, for you are robbing me, the whole nation of you. 10Bring the full tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house. And thereby put me to the test, says the LORD of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down for you a blessing until there is no more need. 11I will rebuke the devourer for you, so that it will not destroy the fruits of your soil, and your vine in the field shall not fail to bear, says the LORD of hosts. 12Then all nations will call you blessed, for you will be a land of delight, says the LORD of hosts. 13“Your words have been hard against me, says the LORD. But you say, ‘How have we spoken against you?’ 14You have said, ‘It is vain to serve God. What is the profit of our keeping his charge or of walking as in mourning before the LORD of hosts? 15And now we call the arrogant blessed. Evildoers not only prosper but they put God to the test and they escape.’”

The Book of Remembrance

16Then those who feared the LORD spoke with one another. The LORD paid attention and heard them, and a book of remembrance was written before him of those who feared the LORD and esteemed his name. 17“They shall be mine, says the LORD of hosts, in the day when I make up my treasured possession, and I will spare them as a man spares his son who serves him. 18Then once more you shall see the distinction between the righteous and the wicked, between one who serves God and one who does not serve him.

The Great Day of the LORD

4:1“For behold, the day is coming, burning like an oven, when all the arrogant and all evildoers will be stubble. The day that is coming shall set them ablaze, says the LORD of hosts, so that it will leave them neither root nor branch. 2But for you who fear my name, the sun of righteousness shall rise with healing in its wings. You shall go out leaping like calves from the stall. 3And you shall tread down the wicked, for they will be ashes under the soles of your feet, on the day when I act, says the LORD of hosts. 4“Remember the law of my servant Moses, the statutes and rules that I commanded him at Horeb for all Israel. 5“Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the LORD comes. 6And he will turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers, lest I come and strike the land with a decree of utter destruction.”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 4:12–25

Jesus Begins His Ministry

12Now when he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galilee. 13And leaving Nazareth he went and lived in Capernaum by the sea, in the territory of Zebulun and Naphtali, 14so that what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled: 15“The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—16the people dwelling in darkness have seen a great light, and for those dwelling in the region and shadow of death, on them a light has dawned.” 17From that time Jesus began to preach, saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”

Jesus Calls the First Disciples

18While walking by the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon (who is called Peter) and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen. 19And he said to them, “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.” 20Immediately they left their nets and followed him. 21And going on from there he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets, and he called them. 22Immediately they left the boat and their father and followed him.

Jesus Ministers to Great Crowds

23And he went throughout all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and proclaim-ing the gospel of the kingdom and healing every disease and every affliction among the people. 24So his fame spread throughout all Syria, and they brought him all the sick, those afflicted with various diseases and pains, those oppressed by demons, epileptics, and paralytics, and he healed them. 25And great crowds followed him from Galilee and the Decapolis, and from Jerusalem and Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.

## Writing

[We do] well to note what class of people takes comfort in the thought of God. Surely not that perverse and crooked generation to whom it was said, “Woe unto you that are rich; for you have received your consolation” (Luke 6:24). Rather, those who can say with truth, “My soul refuses comfort” (Ps. 77:2). For it is meet that those who are not satisfied by the present should be sustained by the thought of the future, and that the contemplation of eternal happiness should solace those who scorn to drink from the river of transitory joys.… In that day those who have not set their hearts aright will feel, too late, how easy is Christ’s yoke, to which they would not bend their necks, and how light His burden, in comparison with the pains they must then endure. O wretched slaves of Mammon, you cannot glory in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ while you trust in treasures laid up on earth; you cannot taste and see how gracious the Lord is while you are hungering for gold. If you have not rejoiced at the thought of His coming, that day will be indeed a day of wrath to you. But the believing soul longs and faints for God; she rests sweetly in the contemplation of Him. She glories in the reproach of the cross, until the glory of His face shall be revealed. Like the Bride, the dove of Christ, that is covered with silver wings (Ps. 68:13), white with innocence and purity, she reposes in the thought of Your abundant kindness, Lord Jesus; and above all she longs for that day when in the joyful splendor of Your saints, gleaming with the radiance of the Beatific Vision, her feathers shall be like gold, resplendent with the joy of Your countenance.—Bernard of Clairvaux

## Hymnody

The people that in darkness sat A glorious light have seen; The light has
shined on them who long In shades of death have been, In shades of death
have been.—The People That in Darkness Sat (LSB 412:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities and stretch forth the hand of Your majesty to heal and defend us; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L15)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIIb (VI) 51–57 [148–154]

[51/148] The adversaries object that revenge or punishment is necessary for repentance, because Augustine says that “repentance is revenge punishing” and so on. We grant that revenge or punishment is necessary in repentance. Yet it is not necessary as merit or price, as the adversaries imagine that satisfactions are necessary. But revenge is in repentance formally, that is, because rebirth itself happens by a continuous putting to death of the oldness of life. The saying of Scotus may indeed be very beautiful, that penitence (poenitentia) is so called because it is “holding to punishment” (poenae tenentia). But what punishment, what revenge, does Augustine speak about? Certainly true punishment, true revenge, namely, contrition, true terrors. Nor do we exclude here the outward putting to death (mortification) of the body, which follows true grief of mind.

[52/149] The adversaries make a great mistake if they imagine that canonical satisfactions are more truly punishments than are true terrors in the heart. It is most foolish to twist the name of punishment to these dull satisfactions, and not to refer people to those horrible terrors of conscience of which David says, “The cords of death encompassed me” (Psalm 18:4; see also 2 Samuel 22:5). Who would not rather, clad in metal armor and equipped, seek the Church of James, the basilica of Peter, and so on, than bear that violence of grief that is beyond words and exists even in persons of ordinary lives, if there be true repentance?

[53/150] They say that it belongs to God’s justice to punish sin. He certainly punishes it in contrition, when in these terrors He shows His wrath. Just as David shows when he prays, “O LORD, rebuke me not in Your anger” (Psalm 6:1). And Jeremiah, “Correct me, O LORD, but in justice; not in Your anger, lest You bring me to nothing” (10:24). Here, indeed, the most bitter punishments are spoken of. The adversaries admit that contrition can be so great that satisfaction is not required. Contrition is, therefore, more truly a punishment than is satisfaction.

[54/151] Besides, saints are subject to death and all general afflictions, as 1 Peter 4:17 says, “For it is time for judgment to begin at the household of God; and if it begins with us, what will be the outcome for those who do not obey the gospel of God?” Although these afflictions are for the most part the punishments of sin, yet in the godly they have a better end, namely, to exercise them, that they may learn amid trials to seek God’s aid, to acknowledge the distrust of their own hearts, and so forth. As Paul says of himself, “Indeed, we felt that we had received the sentence of death. But that was to make us rely not on ourselves but on God who raises the dead” (2 Corinthians 1:9). Isaiah says, “They poured out a whispered prayer when Your discipline was upon them” (26:16), that is, afflictions are a discipline by which God exercises the saints.

[55/152] Likewise, afflictions are inflicted because of present sin, since in the saints they put to death and extinguish lustful desires, so that they may be renewed by the Spirit, as Paul says, “The body is dead because of sin” (Romans 8:10). The body is put to death (mortified) because of present sin that is still left in the flesh.

[56/153] Death itself serves this purpose, namely, to abolish this flesh of sin, that we may rise absolutely new [1 Corinthians 15:42]. Since by faith the believer has overcome death’s terrors, there is no longer in the believer’s death that sting and sense of anger of which Paul says, “The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law” (1 Corinthians 15:56). This strength of sin, this sense of wrath, is truly a punishment as long as it is present. Without this sense of wrath, death is not properly a punishment.

[57/154] Furthermore, canonical satisfactions do not belong to these punishments. The adversaries wrongly say that by the Power of the Keys a part of the punishments is forgiven. Likewise, according to these very men, the Keys pardon the satisfactions and the punishments because of which the satisfactions are made. But it is clear that common troubles are not removed by the Power of the Keys. If the adversaries wish to be understood regarding these punishments, why do they add that satisfaction is to be accomplished in purgatory?
