# September 23

## Psalmody

5Behold, I was brought forth in in- | iquity,* and in sin did my mother con- | ceive me. 6Behold, you delight in truth in the inward | being,* and you teach me wisdom in the | secret heart. 7Purge me with hyssop, and I | shall be clean;* wash me, and I shall be whit- | er than snow. 8Let me hear joy and | gladness;* let the bones that you have bro- | ken rejoice. 9Hide your face | from my sins,* and blot out all my in- | iquities. 10Create in me a clean heart, | O God,* and renew a right spirit with- | in me. 11Cast me not away from your | presence,* and take not your Holy Spirit | from me. 12Restore to me the joy of your sal- | vation,* and uphold me with a willing | spirit. 13Then I will teach transgressors | your ways,* and sinners will re- | turn to you.—Psalm 51:5–13
Additional Psalm: Psalm 12

## Old Testament Reading: Nehemiah 9:1–21

The People of Israel Confess Their Sin

1Now on the twenty-fourth day of this month the people of Israel were assembled with fasting and in sackcloth, and with earth on their heads. 2And the Israelites separated themselves from all foreigners and stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their fathers. 3And they stood up in their place and read from the Book of the Law of the LORD their God for a quarter of the day; for another quarter of it they made confession and worshiped the LORD their God. 4On the stairs of the Levites stood Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani; and they cried with a loud voice to the LORD their God. 5Then the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, “Stand up and bless the LORD your God from everlasting to everlasting. Blessed be your glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise. 6“You are the LORD, you alone. You have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them; and you preserve all of them; and the host of heaven worships you. 7You are the LORD, the God who chose Abram and brought him out of Ur of the Chaldeans and gave him the name Abraham. 8You found his heart faithful before you, and made with him the covenant to give to his offspring the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Jebusite, and the Girgashite. And you have kept your promise, for you are righteous. 9“And you saw the affliction of our fathers in Egypt and heard their cry at the Red Sea, 10and performed signs and wonders against Pharaoh and all his servants and all the people of his land, for you knew that they acted arrogantly against our fathers. And you made a name for yourself, as it is to this day. 11And you divided the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on dry land, and you cast their pursuers into the depths, as a stone into mighty waters. 12By a pillar of cloud you led them in the day, and by a pillar of fire in the night to light for them the way in which they should go. 13You came down on Mount Sinai and spoke with them from heaven and gave them right rules and true laws, good statutes and commandments, 14and you made known to them your holy Sabbath and commanded them commandments and statutes and a law by Moses your servant. 15You gave them bread from heaven for their hunger and brought water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and you told them to go in to possess the land that you had sworn to give them. 16“But they and our fathers acted presumptuously and stiffened their neck and did not obey your commandments. 17They refused to obey and were not mindful of the wonders that you performed among them, but they stiffened their neck and appointed a leader to return to their slavery in Egypt. But you are a God ready to forgive, gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love, and did not forsake them. 18Even when they had made for themselves a golden calf and said, ‘This is your God who brought you up out of Egypt,’ and had committed great blasphemies, 19you in your great mercies did not forsake them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud to lead them in the way did not depart from them by day, nor the pillar of fire by night to light for them the way by which they should go. 20You gave your good Spirit to instruct them and did not withhold your manna from their mouth and gave them water for their thirst. 21Forty years you sustained them in the wilderness, and they lacked nothing. Their clothes did not wear out and their feet did not swell.”

## New Testament Reading: 1 Timothy 5:17–6:2

[Instructions for the Church]

17Let the elders who rule well be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in preaching and teaching. 18For the Scripture says, “You shall not muzzle an ox when it treads out the grain,” and, “The laborer deserves his wages.” 19Do not admit a charge against an elder except on the evidence of two or three witnesses. 20As for those who persist in sin, rebuke them in the presence of all, so that the rest may stand in fear. 21In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus and of the elect angels I charge you to keep these rules without prejudging, doing nothing from partiality. 22Do not be hasty in the laying on of hands, nor take part in the sins of others; keep yourself pure. 23(No longer drink only water, but use a little wine for the sake of your stomach and your frequent ailments.) 24The sins of some men are conspicuous, going before them to judgment, but the sins of others appear later. 25So also good works are conspicuous, and even those that are not cannot remain hidden. 6:1Let all who are under a yoke as slaves regard their own masters as worthy of all honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may not be reviled. 2Those who have believing masters must not be disrespectful on the ground that they are brothers; rather they must serve all the better since those who benefit by their good service are believers and beloved. Teach and urge these things.

## Writing

Benedict of Nursia’s advice about singing. We believe that God is present every-where and that the eyes of the Lord behold the good and the bad in every place (cf. Prov. 15:3). Let us firmly believe this, especially when we take part in [the Divine Service]. Let us, therefore, always be mindful of what the prophet says, “Serve the Lord with fear” (Ps. 2:11). And again, “Sing wisely” (Ps. 46:8). And, “I will sing praise to You in the sight of the angels” (Ps. 137:1). Therefore, let us consider how it benefits us to behave in the sight of God and His angels, and let us then stand to sing, that our minds may be in harmony with our voices. Benedict’s advice about prayer. If we do not dare to approach men who are in power except with humility and reverence when we wish to ask a favor, how much must we make requests of the Lord God of all things with all humility and purity of devotion? And let us be assured that it is not in many words, but it is by hearts [declared] pure and with repentant tears, that we are heard. For this reason prayer ought to be short and pure, unless, perhaps, it is lengthened by the inspiration of divine grace. When we pray together [in the Divine Service], however, let the prayer always be short.—Benedict of Nursia

## Hymnody

We share our mutual woes, Our mutual burdens bear, And often for each
other flows The sympathizing tear.—Blest Be the Tie That Binds (LSB
649:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord of all power and might, author and giver of all good things, graft into our hearts the love of Your name, increase in us true religion, nourish us with all goodness, and of Your great mercy keep us in the same; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (H66)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIIb (VI) 16–24 [113–121]

[16/113] The word satisfaction has been left from this rite of public repentance. The Holy Fathers were unwilling to welcome back the fallen or the notorious sinners unless, as far as it was possible, their repentance had been first examined and shown publicly. There seem to have been many causes for this. To discipline those who had fallen served as an example, as the gloss upon the decrees reminds us. Also, it was improper to admit notorious people immediately to Communion. These customs have long since grown obsolete. It is not necessary to restore them, because they are not necessary for the forgiveness of sins before God.

[17/114] The Fathers did not maintain that people merit the forgiveness of sins through such customs or works. These spectacles ‹outward ceremonies› usually lead astray the ignorant, who thought that they merited the forgiveness of sins before God by these works. If anyone believes this, he has the faith of a Jewish person and a pagan. For even the pagans had certain remedies for offenses through which they imagined they were reconciled to God.

[18/115] Now, even though the custom has been cast aside, the word satisfaction still remains. A small part of the custom also remains of prescribing in confession certain satisfactions, which they define as works that are not required. We call them canonical satisfactions.

[19/116] Like the complete listing of sins, we hold that canonical satisfactions are not necessary by divine Law for the forgiveness of sins. Neither were those ancient displays of satisfactions in public repentance necessary by divine Law for the forgiveness of sins. The teaching about faith must be kept, that we receive the forgiveness of sins for Christ’s sake through faith, not for the sake of our works that precede or follow. This is why we have discussed especially the question of satisfactions—the righteousness of faith should not be clouded over in submitting to them. Nor should people think that they receive the forgiveness of sins for the sake of these works.

[20/117] Many current sayings in the schools aid the error. Among these are those that give the definition of satisfaction, namely, that it is done to reconcile divine displeasure.

[21/118] Nevertheless, the adversaries admit that satisfactions do not help in the pardon of guilt. They imagine that satisfactions help in delivering one from punishment, whether of purgatory or other punishments. They teach that God pardons guilt in the forgiveness of sins. Yet, because divine justice requires sin to be punished, He transfers eternal punishment into temporal punishment. Further, they add that a part of this temporal punishment is pardoned by the Power of the Keys, but that the rest is delivered by means of satisfactions. It cannot be understood which punishments the Power of the Keys partially forgive, unless the adversaries say that a part of the punishments of purgatory is forgiven. That would mean that satisfactions are only punishments delivering from purgatory. They say satisfactions benefit, even though they are presented by those who have fallen again into mortal sin, as though indeed the divine displeasure could be appeased by those who are in mortal sin.

[22/119] This entire matter is fake and recently made up without Scriptural authority and the old writers of the Church. Not even Lombard speaks of satisfactions in this way.

[23/120] The Scholastics saw that there were satisfactions in the Church. They did not notice that these displays had been set up both for the purpose of example and for testing those who desired to be welcomed back by the Church. In a word, they did not see that it was a discipline and entirely a secular matter. So they superstitiously imagined that these [displays] benefit not for discipline before the Church, but for reconciling God. In other places, they frequently, with great incompetence, have confused spiritual and civil matters. The same happens also regarding satisfactions.

[24/121] But at various places the explanation of the canons confirms that these observances were set up for the sake of Church discipline.
