# September 22

## Psalmody

1Behold, how good and pleas- | ant it is* when brothers dwell in | unity! 2It is like the precious oil on the head, running down on the beard, on the beard of | Aaron,* running down on the collar | of his robes! 3It is like the dew of Hermon, which falls on the mountains of | Zion!* For there the LORD has commanded the blessing, life for- | evermore.—Psalm 133
Additional Psalm: Psalm 119:97–104

## Old Testament Reading: Nehemiah 7:1–4; 8:1–18

[The Wall Is Finished]

1Now when the wall had been built and I had set up the doors, and the gatekeepers, the singers, and the Levites had been appointed, 2I gave my brother Hanani and Hananiah the governor of the castle charge over Jerusalem, for he was a more faithful and God-fearing man than many. 3And I said to them, “Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun is hot. And while they are still standing guard, let them shut and bar the doors. Appoint guards from among the inhabitants of Jerusalem, some at their guard posts and some in front of their own homes.” 4The city was wide and large, but the people within it were few, and no houses had been rebuilt.…

Ezra Reads the Law

8:1And all the people gathered as one man into the square before the Water Gate. And they told Ezra the scribe to bring the Book of the Law of Moses that the LORD had commanded Israel. 2So Ezra the priest brought the Law before the assembly, both men and women and all who could understand what they heard, on the first day of the seventh month. 3And he read from it facing the square before the Water Gate from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women and those who could understand. And the ears of all the people were attentive to the Book of the Law. 4And Ezra the scribe stood on a wooden platform that they had made for the purpose. And beside him stood Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maaseiah on his right hand, and Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum, Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam on his left hand. 5And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people, for he was above all the people, and as he opened it all the people stood. 6And Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God, and all the people answered, “Amen, Amen,” lifting up their hands. And they bowed their heads and worshiped the LORD with their faces to the ground. 7Also Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, the Levites, helped the people to understand the Law, while the people remained in their places. 8They read from the book, from the Law of God, clearly, and they gave the sense, so that the people understood the reading.

This Day Is Holy

9And Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra the priest and scribe, and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people, “This day is holy to the LORD your God; do not mourn or weep.” For all the people wept as they heard the words of the Law. 10Then he said to them, “Go your way. Eat the fat and drink sweet wine and send portions to anyone who has nothing ready, for this day is holy to our Lord. And do not be grieved, for the joy of the LORD is your strength.” 11So the Levites calmed all the people, saying, “Be quiet, for this day is holy; do not be grieved.” 12And all the people went their way to eat and drink and to send portions and to make great rejoicing, because they had understood the words that were declared to them.

Feast of Booths Celebrated

13On the second day the heads of fathers’ houses of all the people, with the priests and the Levites, came together to Ezra the scribe in order to study the words of the Law. 14And they found it written in the Law that the LORD had commanded by Moses that the people of Israel should dwell in booths during the feast of the seventh month, 15and that they should proclaim it and publish it in all their towns and in Jerusalem, “Go out to the hills and bring branches of olive, wild olive, myrtle, palm, and other leafy trees to make booths, as it is written.” 16So the people went out and brought them and made booths for themselves, each on his roof, and in their courts and in the courts of the house of God, and in the square at the Water Gate and in the square at the Gate of Ephraim. 17And all the assembly of those who had returned from the captivity made booths and lived in the booths, for from the days of Jeshua the son of Nun to that day the people of Israel had not done so. And there was very great rejoicing. 18And day by day, from the first day to the last day, he read from the Book of the Law of God. They kept the feast seven days, and on the eighth day there was a solemn assembly, according to the rule. Additional Reading: Ezra 1:1–10:19

## New Testament Reading: 1 Timothy 5:1–16

Instructions for the Church

1Do not rebuke an older man but encourage him as you would a father, younger men as brothers, 2older women as mothers, younger women as sisters, in all purity. 3Honor widows who are truly widows. 4But if a widow has children or grandchil-dren, let them first learn to show godliness to their own household and to make some return to their parents, for this is pleasing in the sight of God. 5She who is truly a widow, left all alone, has set her hope on God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day, 6but she who is self-indulgent is dead even while she lives. 7Command these things as well, so that they may be without reproach. 8But if anyone does not provide for his relatives, and especially for members of his household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever. 9Let a widow be enrolled if she is not less than sixty years of age, having been the wife of one husband, 10and having a reputation for good works: if she has brought up children, has shown hospitality, has washed the feet of the saints, has cared for the afflicted, and has devoted herself to every good work. 11But refuse to enroll younger widows, for when their passions draw them away from Christ, they desire to marry 12and so incur condemnation for having abandoned their former faith. 13Besides that, they learn to be idlers, going about from house to house, and not only idlers, but also gossips and busy-bodies, saying what they should not. 14So I would have younger widows marry, bear children, manage their households, and give the adversary no occasion for slander. 15For some have already strayed after Satan. 16If any believing woman has relatives who are widows, let her care for them. Let the church not be burdened, so that it may care for those who are truly widows.

## Writing

[Worship] is not a function of the mouth but of the whole body. It is to bow the head, bend the body, fall on the knees, prostrate one’s self, and so forth, and to do such things as a sign and acknowledgment of an authority and power; just as people bow in silence before secular princes and Lords, and just as popes, bishops, abbots, and people generally, have themselves honored and adored [ehrbieten] by bowing and kneeling, and so forth. Such outward adoration [ehrbietunge] is what the Scriptures really mean by worship [anbeten]… We read in the Scriptures that worship [anbeten] or adoration [ehrbieten] is rendered outwardly both to God and to kings without distinction, just as bowing and kneeling are still rendered outwardly both to God and to men. From this understanding of outward worship you will also understand what Christ meant by true spiritual worship. It is the adoration or bowing of the heart, so that from the bottom of your heart you thereby show and confess yourself to be his subordinate creature. For from this you see that true worship can be nothing else than faith; it is faith’s sublimest activity with respect to God. For no one is capable of such heartfelt confession, adoration, bending, and bowing (or whatever you want to call it) before God in his heart, unless he unwaveringly holds God to be his Lord and Father, from whom he receives and will receive all good things, and through whom, without any merit on his part, he is redeemed and preserved from all sins and evil.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

Penitent sinners, for mercy crying, Pardon and peace from Him obtain; Ever
the wants of the poor supplying, Their faithful God He will remain. He
helps His children in distress, The widows and the fatherless. Alleluia,
alleluia!—Praise the Almighty (LSB 797:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, through the prophet Jonah, You continued the prophetic pattern of teaching Your people the true faith and demonstrating through miracles Your presence in creation to heal it of its brokenness. Grant that Your Church may see in Your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the final end-times prophet whose teaching and miracles continue in Your Church through the healing medicine of the Gospel and the Sacraments; through Jesus Christ, our Lord. (1092) Jonah A singular prophet among the many in the Old Testament, Jonah the son of Amittai was born about an hour’s walk from the town of Nazareth. The focus of his prophetic ministry was the call to preach at Nineveh, the capital of pagan Assyria (Jonah 1:2). His reluctance to respond and God’s insistence that His call be heeded is the story of the book that bears Jonah’s name. Although the swallowing and disgorging of Jonah by the great fish is the most remembered detail of his life, it is addressed in only three verses of the book (Jonah 1:17; 2:1, 10). Throughout the book, the important theme is how God deals compassionately with sinners. Jonah’s three-day sojourn in the belly of the fish is mentioned by Jesus as a sign of His own death, burial, and resurrection (Matthew 12:39–41).

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIIb (VI) 1–15 [98–112]

[1/98] Good people can easily conclude that it is very important that the true doctrine be preserved about the above-mentioned parts: contrition and faith. Therefore, we have always been busier with making these topics clear and have argued nothing as yet about confession and satisfaction.

[2/99] We also keep Confession, especially because of the Absolution. Absolution is God’s Word which, by divine authority, the Power of the Keys pronounces upon individuals.

[3/100] Therefore, it would be wicked to remove private Absolution from the Church.

[4/101] If anyone despises private Absolution, he does not understand what the forgiveness of sins or the Power of the Keys is.

[5/102] Regarding the complete listing of offenses in Confession, we have said above that we hold that it is not necessary by divine right.

[6/103] Some object to this, saying that a judge should investigate a case before he rules on it, which has nothing to do with this subject. The ministry of Absolution is favor or grace; it is not a legal process or law.

[7/104] Ministers in the Church have the command to forgive sin. They do not have the command to investigate secret sins.

[8/105] Indeed, they absolve us from those sins that we do not remember. For that reason Absolution, which is the voice of the Gospel forgiving sins and comforting consciences, does not require judicial examination.

[9/106] It is ridiculous to apply to this discussion the saying of Solomon, “Know well the condition of your flocks” (Proverbs 27:23). For Solomon says nothing about Confession. He gives to the father of a family a domestic precept, that he should use what is his own and refrain from what is another’s. Solomon commands the father to take good care of his own property. Yet he should do so in such a way that, with his mind occupied with the increase of his resources, he should not cast away the fear of God or faith or care in God’s Word. But our adversaries, by a wonderful change, transform Scripture passages to whatever meaning they please. Here to “know” means to them hearing confessions, “the condition,” not the outward life, but the secrets of conscience. And “your flocks” mean people. The interpretation is truly neat and is worthy of these haters of pursuing eloquence. If anyone desires to transfer by analogy a precept from a father of a family to a pastor of a Church, he should certainly interpret “the condition” as applying to the outward life. This comparison will be more consistent.

[10/107] Let us skip such matters as these. Confession is mentioned at different times in the Psalms. “‘I will confess my transgressions to the LORD,’ and You forgave the iniquity of my sin” (32:5). Such confession of sin, which is made to God, is contrition itself. When confession is made to God, it must be made with the heart, not only with the voice, like actors on the stage. Confession is contrition in which, feeling God’s anger, we confess that God is justly angry and that He cannot be reconciled by our works. Yet, we seek for mercy because of God’s promise.

[11/108] Such is the following confession, “Against You, You only, have I sinned . . . so that You may be justified in Your words and blameless in Your judgment” (Psalm 51:4). This means, “I confess that I am a sinner and have merited eternal wrath. Nor can I set my righteousnesses, my merits, against Your wrath. So I declare that You are just when You condemn and punish us. I declare that You are clear when hypocrites judge You to be unjust in punishing them or in condemning the well-deserving. Yes, our merits cannot satisfy Your judgment. But we will be justified in this way, namely, if You justify us, if through Your mercy You count us righteous.”

[12/109] Perhaps someone may also cite James 5:16, “Confess your sins to one another.” But here the reference is not to confession made to priests, but is the reconciliation of brothers to each other. Confession should be mutual.

[13/110] Our adversaries will condemn many well-respected teachers if they will agree that in Confession a listing of offenses is necessary according to divine Law. We approve of Confession, and conclude that some examination is helpful, so that people may be instructed better. Yet, Confession must be done in such a way that consciences are not entrapped. They never will be quieted if they think that they cannot receive the forgiveness of sins unless this precise listing is made.

[14/111] What the adversaries have expressed in the Confutation is certainly most false: A full confession is necessary for salvation. This is impossible. What traps they lay for the conscience when they require a full confession! When will a conscience be sure that the confession is complete?

[15/112] Church writers mention Confession. However, they do not speak about this listing of secret offenses, but about the rite of public repentance. The fallen or notorious sinners were not received [into fellowship] without fixed satisfactions. They confessed to the presbyters, so that satisfactions might be prescribed to them according to the degree of their guilt. This type of confession has nothing similar to the listing about which we are arguing. This kind of confession was made, not because the forgiveness of sins before God could not happen without it, but because satisfactions could not be prescribed unless the kinds of offense were first known. Different offenses had different rules.
