# September 24

## Psalmody

1To you I lift | up my eyes,* O you who are enthroned in the | heavens! 2Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maidservant to the hand of her | mistress,* so our eyes look to the LORD our God, till he has mercy up- | on us. 3Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy up- | on us,* for we have had more than enough | of contempt. 4Our soul has had more than enough of the scorn of those who | are at ease,* of the contempt | of the proud.—Psalm 123
Additional Psalm: Psalm 99

## Old Testament Reading: Nehemiah 9:22–38

[The People of Israel Confess Their Sin]

22“And you gave them kingdoms and peoples and allotted to them every corner. So they took possession of the land of Sihon king of Heshbon and the land of Og king of Bashan. 23You multiplied their children as the stars of heaven, and you brought them into the land that you had told their fathers to enter and possess. 24So the descendants went in and possessed the land, and you subdued before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gave them into their hand, with their kings and the peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would. 25And they captured fortified cities and a rich land, and took possession of houses full of all good things, cisterns already hewn, vineyards, olive orchards and fruit trees in abundance. So they ate and were filled and became fat and delighted themselves in your great goodness. 26“Nevertheless, they were disobedient and rebelled against you and cast your law behind their back and killed your prophets, who had warned them in order to turn them back to you, and they committed great blasphemies. 27Therefore you gave them into the hand of their enemies, who made them suffer. And in the time of their suffering they cried out to you and you heard them from heaven, and according to your great mercies you gave them saviors who saved them from the hand of their enemies. 28But after they had rest they did evil again before you, and you abandoned them to the hand of their enemies, so that they had dominion over them. Yet when they turned and cried to you, you heard from heaven, and many times you delivered them according to your mercies. 29And you warned them in order to turn them back to your law. Yet they acted presumptuously and did not obey your commandments, but sinned against your rules, which if a person does them, he shall live by them, and they turned a stubborn shoulder and stiffened their neck and would not obey. 30Many years you bore with them and warned them by your Spirit through your prophets. Yet they would not give ear. Therefore you gave them into the hand of the peoples of the lands. 31Nevertheless, in your great mercies you did not make an end of them or forsake them, for you are a gracious and merciful God. 32“Now, therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the awesome God, who keeps covenant and steadfast love, let not all the hardship seem little to you that has come upon us, upon our kings, our princes, our priests, our prophets, our fathers, and all your people, since the time of the kings of Assyria until this day. 33Yet you have been righteous in all that has come upon us, for you have dealt faithfully and we have acted wickedly. 34Our kings, our princes, our priests, and our fathers have not kept your law or paid attention to your commandments and your warnings that you gave them. 35Even in their own kingdom, and amid your great goodness that you gave them, and in the large and rich land that you set before them, they did not serve you or turn from their wicked works. 36Behold, we are slaves this day; in the land that you gave to our fathers to enjoy its fruit and its good gifts, behold, we are slaves. 37And its rich yield goes to the kings whom you have set over us because of our sins. They rule over our bodies and over our livestock as they please, and we are in great distress. 38“Because of all this we make a firm covenant in writing; on the sealed document are the names of our princes, our Levites, and our priests.” Additional Reading: Nehemiah 10:1–13:31

## New Testament Reading: 1 Timothy 6:3–21

[False Teachers and True Contentment]

3If anyone teaches a different doctrine and does not agree with the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the teaching that accords with godliness, 4he is puffed up with conceit and understands nothing. He has an unhealthy craving for controversy and for quarrels about words, which produce envy, dissension, slander, evil suspicions, 5and constant friction among people who are depraved in mind and deprived of the truth, imagining that godliness is a means of gain. 6Now there is great gain in godliness with contentment, 7for we brought nothing into the world, and we cannot take anything out of the world. 8But if we have food and clothing, with these we will be content. 9But those who desire to be rich fall into temptation, into a snare, into many senseless and harmful desires that plunge people into ruin and destruction. 10For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evils. It is through this craving that some have wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many pangs.

Fight the Good Fight of Faith

11But as for you, O man of God, flee these things. Pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, steadfastness, gentleness. 12Fight the good fight of the faith. Take hold of the eternal life to which you were called and about which you made the good confession in the presence of many witnesses. 13I charge you in the presence of God, who gives life to all things, and of Christ Jesus, who in his testimony before Pontius Pilate made the good confession, 14to keep the commandment unstained and free from reproach until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 15which he will display at the proper time—he who is the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings and Lord of lords, 16who alone has immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no one has ever seen or can see. To him be honor and eternal dominion. Amen. 17As for the rich in this present age, charge them not to be haughty, nor to set their hopes on the uncertainty of riches, but on God, who richly provides us with everything to enjoy. 18They are to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous and ready to share, 19thus storing up treasure for themselves as a good foundation for the future, so that they may take hold of that which is truly life. 20O Timothy, guard the deposit entrust-ed to you. Avoid the irreverent babble and contradictions of what is falsely called “knowledge,” 21for by professing it some have swerved from the faith. Grace be with you.

## Writing

The one body of Christ has a threefold existence, or all three modes of being at a given place. First, the circumscribed corporeal mode of presence, as when He walked bodily on earth, when He occupied and yielded space according to His size. He can still employ this mode of presence when He wills to do so, as He did after His resurrection and as He will do on the Last Day, as Paul says in 1 Timothy [6:15], “Whom the blessed God will reveal,” and Colossians 3[:4], “When Christ your life reveals Himself.” He is not in God or with the Father or in heaven according to this mode …, for God is not a corporeal space or place.… Secondly, the uncircumscribed, spiritual mode of presence according to which He neither occupies nor yields space but passes through everything created as He wills. To use some crude illustrations, my vision passes through and exists in air, light, or water and does not occupy or yield any space; a sound or tone passes through and exists in air or water or a board and a wall and neither occupies nor yields space… He employed this mode of presence when He left the closed grave and came through closed doors, in the bread and wine in the Supper, and, as people believe, when He was born in His mother. Thirdly, since He is one person with God, the divine, heavenly mode, according to which all created things are indeed much more permeable and present to Him than they are according to the second mode… You must place this existence of Christ, which constitutes Him one person with God, far, far beyond things created, as far as God transcends them; and on the other hand, place it as deep in and as near to all created things as God is in them. For He is one indivisible person with God, and wherever God is, He must be also, otherwise our faith is false.—Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VII 98–101

## Hymnody

To Thee, great One in Three, Eternal praises be Hence evermore! Thy
sov’reign majesty May we in glory see, And to eternity Love and adore.—
Come, Thou Almighty King (LSB 905:4)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, our refuge and strength, the author of all godliness, by Your grace hear the prayers of Your Church. Grant that those things which we ask in faith we may receive through Your bountiful mercy; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (C80)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIIb (VI) 25–33 [122–130]

[25/122] In the Confutation, the adversaries had the nerve to impose on His Imperial Majesty. Let us see how they prove these fables of theirs. They cite many passages from the Scriptures to impress the inexperienced. They do this as though this subject—unknown even in the time of Lombard—had authority from the Scriptures. They promote such passages as these: “Bear fruit in keeping with repentance” (Matthew 3:8; see also Mark 1:15). “Present your members as slaves to righteousness” (Romans 6:19). Christ preaches repentance, “Repent” (Matthew 4:17). Again, Christ commands the apostles to preach repentance (Luke 24:47), and Peter preaches repentance (Acts 2:38). Afterward, the adversaries quote certain passages of the Fathers and the canons, and conclude that satisfactions in the Church are not to be set aside. This is contrary to the plain Gospel and the decrees of the councils and Fathers. They even claim that those who have been absolved by the priest should finish the repentance that has been directed. They base this on Paul’s declaration, “Who gave Himself for us to redeem us from all lawlessness and to purify for Himself a people for His own possession who are zealous for good works” (Titus 2:14).

[26/123] May God confuse these godless philosophers. They wickedly distort God’s Word to their own most empty dreams! What good person is not moved by such insult? “Christ says, ‘Repent,’ the apostles preach repentance; therefore, eternal punishments are relieved by the punishments of purgatory; therefore, the Keys have the power to pardon part of the punishments of purgatory; therefore, satisfactions deliver from the punishments of purgatory!” Who has taught these asses such logic? Yet this is neither logic nor slick thinking, but deceitful trickery. They appeal to the expression “repent” in such a way that, when the inexperienced hear such a passage cited against us, they may come to the opinion that we deny repentance in its entirety. By these moves they try hard to turn away minds and to stir up hatred. They do this so that the inexperienced may cry out against us, that the deadly heretics that disapprove of repentance should be removed from their midst.

[27/124] We hope that these lies may make little headway among good people. We also hope that God will not put up with such rudeness and wickedness much longer. The pope of Rome has not become any more dignified using such patrons, because he has entrusted a very important matter of the greatest importance to the judgment of these philosophers. Since we include almost all of the Christian doctrine in the Confession, judges should have been appointed to declare about important and various matters. Their learning and faith would have been more acceptable than the learning of these philosophers who have written this Confutation.

[28/125] It was very fitting of you, O Campegius, according to your wisdom, to have made sure that they should write nothing about important matters that, either now or later, might appear to lower respect for the Roman See. If the Roman See determines that all nations should recognize her as mistress of the faith, she should try very hard to have educated and godly people investigate religious matters. What will the world conclude if at any time the adversaries’ writing is brought to light? What will future generations think about these disgraceful judicial investigations?

[29/126] You see, O Campegius, that these are the last days. Christ predicted that the greatest danger to religion would happen in them [Matthew 24:9–28]. You, who should sit on the watchtower [Hosea 9:8] and control religious matters, should in these times also use unusual wisdom and diligence. Unless you heed them, there are many signs that threaten a change to the Roman state.

[30/127] And you make a mistake if you think that churches should be kept only by force and arms. The people are asking to be taught about religion. How many do you suppose there are, not only in Germany, but also in England, in Spain, in France, in Italy, and finally even in the city of Rome? Since controversies have come up about subjects of the greatest importance, they are beginning to doubt here and there, to be silently insulted that you refuse to investigate and rightly judge such weighty subjects. They doubt and are insulted that you do not help wavering consciences, that you only ask us to be overthrown and destroyed by arms.

[31/128] To many good people this doubt is more bitter than death. You do not think enough about how great a subject religion is, if you think that good people are in anguish for little reason when they doubt any teaching. This doubt can have no other effect than to produce the greatest bitterness of hatred against those who hinder the explanation of the subject when they should heal consciences.

[32/129] We are not saying here that you should fear God’s judgment. The religious leaders think that they can easily ensure against this since they hold the Keys. Of course, they can open heaven for themselves whenever they want. We are speaking of the judgments of people and the silent desires of all nations. At this time they require that these matters be investigated and decided so that good minds may be healed and freed from doubt. For, according to your wisdom, you can easily decide what will happen if at any time this hatred should break out against you. By this favor you will be able to bind all nations to yourself. All sane people regard it as the highest and most important matter if you heal doubting consciences.

[33/130] We have said these things not because we doubt our Confession. For we know that it is true, godly, and useful to godly consciences. It is likely that there are many in many places who waver about matters of no small importance. Yet they do not hear teachers that are able to heal their consciences.
