# September 28

## Psalmody

17The LORD is righteous in | all his ways* and kind in | all his works. 18The LORD is near to all who | call on him,* to all who call on | him in truth. 19He fulfills the desire of those who | fear him;* he also hears their cry and | saves them. 20The LORD preserves all who | love him,* but all the wicked he | will destroy. 21My mouth will speak the praise | of the LORD,* and let all flesh bless his holy name forever and | ever.—Psalm 145:17–21
Additional Psalm: Psalm 145

## Old Testament Reading: Deuteronomy 1:1–18

The Command to Leave Horeb

1These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in the Arabah opposite Suph, between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Dizahab. 2It is eleven days’ journey from Horeb by the way of Mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea. 3In the fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses spoke to the people of Israel according to all that the LORD had given him in commandment to them, 4after he had defeated Sihon the king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who lived in Ashtaroth and in Edrei. 5Beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab, Moses undertook to explain this law, saying, 6“The LORD our God said to us in Horeb, ‘You have stayed long enough at this mountain. 7Turn and take your journey, and go to the hill country of the Amorites and to all their neighbors in the Arabah, in the hill country and in the lowland and in the Negeb and by the seacoast, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates. 8See, I have set the land before you. Go in and take possession of the land that the LORD swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them and to their offspring after them.’

Leaders Appointed

9“At that time I said to you, ‘I am not able to bear you by myself. 10The LORD your God has multiplied you, and behold, you are today as numerous as the stars of heaven. 11May the LORD, the God of your fathers, make you a thousand times as many as you are and bless you, as he has promised you! 12How can I bear by myself the weight and burden of you and your strife? 13Choose for your tribes wise, understanding, and experienced men, and I will appoint them as your heads.’ 14And you answered me, ‘The thing that you have spoken is good for us to do.’ 15So I took the heads of your tribes, wise and experienced men, and set them as heads over you, commanders of thousands, commanders of hundreds, commanders of fifties, commanders of tens, and officers, throughout your tribes. 16And I charged your judges at that time, ‘Hear the cases between your brothers, and judge righteously between a man and his brother or the alien who is with him. 17You shall not be partial in judgment. You shall hear the small and the great alike. You shall not be intimidated by anyone, for the judgment is God’s. And the case that is too hard for you, you shall bring to me, and I will hear it.’ 18And I commanded you at that time all the things that you should do.”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 5:1–20

The Sermon on the Mount

1Seeing the crowds, he went up on the mountain, and when he sat down, his disciples came to him.

The Beatitudes

2And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying: 3“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 4“Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. 5“Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. 6“Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. 7“Blessed are the merciful, for they shall receive mercy. 8“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 9“Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God. 10“Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 11“Blessed are you when others revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account. 12Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for so they persecuted the prophets who were before you.

Salt and Light

13“You are the salt of the earth, but if salt has lost its taste, how shall its saltiness be restored? It is no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled under people’s feet. 14“You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden. 15Nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on a stand, and it gives light to all in the house. 16In the same way, let your light shine before others, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven.

Christ Came to Fulfill the Law

17“Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. 18For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished. 19Therefore whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. 20For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.”

## Writing

The cross … is that dying of the old man which is the result of his encounter with Christ… [T]he cross is not the terrible end to an otherwise god-fearing and happy life, but it meets us at the beginning of our communion with Christ. When Christ calls a man, he bids him come and die… [I]t is the same death every time—death in Jesus Christ, the death of the old man…. [O]nly the man who is dead to his own will can follow Christ. In fact, every command of Jesus is a call to die, with all our affections and lusts. But we do not want to die, and therefore Jesus Christ and… the baptism in the name of [Christ] … means both death and life… [B]aptism sets the Christian in the middle of the daily arena against sin and the devil… The wounds and scars he receives in the fray are living tokens of this participation in the cross of his Lord… While it is true that only the sufferings of Christ are a means of atonement, yet since he has suffered for and borne the sins of the whole world and shares with his disciples the fruits of his passion, the Christian also has to … bear the sins of others…. But he would certainly break down under this burden, but for the support of him who bore the sins of all. The passion of Christ strengthens him to overcome the sins of others by forgiving them. He becomes the bearer of other men’s burdens—“Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ” (Gal. 6:2). As Christ bears our burdens, so ought we to bear the burdens of our fellow-men. The law of Christ … is the bearing of the cross. My brother’s burden which I must bear is not only his outward lot, his natural characteristics and gifts, but quite literally his sin. And the only way to bear that sin is by forgiving it in the power of the cross of Christ in which I now share… Forgiveness is the Christlike suffering which it is the Christian’s duty to bear.—Dietrich Bonhoeffer

## Hymnody

“Blessèd are the meek and humble, All the earth to them is willed. Those
who hunger to be holy, They are bless’d and will be filled. Yes, the merciful
are blessèd, Mercy will to them be shown. And the pure in heart are blessèd,
They have eyes for God alone.”—Jesus Sat with His Disciples (LSB 932:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, You know we live in the midst of so many dangers that in our frailty we cannot stand upright. Grant strength and protection to support us in all dangers and carry us through all temptations; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L16)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XIIb (VI) 58–66 [155–163]

[58/155] They object to Adam’s example, and also to David’s, who was punished for his adultery. From these examples they get the universal rule that peculiar temporal punishments in the forgiveness of sins correspond to individual sins.

[59/156] It has been said before that saints suffer punishments, which are God’s works. They suffer contrition or terrors; they also suffer other common troubles. So, for example, some suffer punishments of their own that have been applied by God. These punishments have nothing to do with the Keys, because the Keys can neither apply nor pardon them. But God, without the ministry of the Keys, applies and pardons them.

Neither does their universal rule follow. A peculiar punishment was put upon David [2 Samuel 12:11–14]. Therefore, in addition to common troubles, [they say] there is another punishment of purgatory, in which each degree corresponds to each sin.

[60/157] Where does Scripture teach that we cannot be freed from eternal death except by the payment of certain punishments in addition to common troubles? On the other hand, Scripture often teaches that the forgiveness of sins arises freely for Christ’s sake, that Christ is the Victor over sin and death [1 Corinthians 15:57]. The merit of satisfaction is not to be patched over this. Although troubles still remain, Scripture interprets these as the putting to death of present sin, and not as the payments of eternal death or as prices for eternal death.

[61/158] Job is excused though he was not troubled by past evil deeds [Job 2:3–10]. Therefore, troubles are not always punishments or signs of wrath. Indeed, terrified consciences should be taught that there are more important purposes for afflictions [2 Corinthians 12:9], so that they do not think God is rejecting them when they see nothing but God’s punishment and anger in troubles. The other more important purposes are to be considered, that is, that God is doing His strange work so that He may be able to do His own work, as Isaiah 28 teaches in a long speech.

[62/159] When the disciples asked about the blind man who sinned, Christ replies that the cause of his blindness is not sin, but that “the works of God might be displayed in him” (John 9:2–3). In Jeremiah it is said, “If those who did not deserve to drink the cup must drink it . . .” (49:12). So the prophets, John the Baptist, and other saints were killed [Matthew 5:11].

[63/160] Therefore, troubles are not always punishments for certain past deeds, but they are God’s works, intended for our benefit, and that God’s power might be made more apparent in our weakness.

So Paul says God’s strength “is made perfect in weakness” (2 Corinthians 12:9). Because of God’s will, our bodies should be sacrifices, to declare our obedience, and not to pay for eternal death. God has another price for that: the death of His own Son.

[64/161] Gregory interprets David’s punishment in this sense, when he says:

If God had threatened that David would be humbled this way by his son because of that sin, why did He fulfill that which He had threatened against him when the sin was forgiven? The reply is that this forgiveness was made so that man might not be hindered from receiving eternal life. The example of the threatening followed, in order that the piety of humanity might be exercised and tested even in this humility. So because of sin, God inflicted upon humanity the death of the body. After the forgiveness of sins, He did not remove the affliction for the sake of exercising justice, namely, so that the righteousness of those who are sanctified might be exercised and tested.

[65/162] Nor are common disasters, properly speaking, removed by these works of canonical satisfactions, that is, by these works of human traditions. The adversaries say that these satisfactions benefit by the outward work (ex opere operato) in such a way that, even though they are done in mortal sin, they still deliver from the punishments.

[66/163] When the passage of Paul is cited against us, “But if we judged ourselves truly, we would not be judged [by the Lord]” (1 Corinthians 11:31), “to judge” should be understood to include all of repentance and required fruit, not works that are not required. Our adversaries pay the penalty for hating grammar when they understand “to judge” to equal making a pilgrimage dressed in armor to the Church of St. James, or similar works. “To judge” means all of repentance; it means to condemn sins.
