# October 6

## Psalmody

9Because you have made the LORD your | dwelling place—* the Most High, who is my | refuge—10no evil shall be allowed to be- | fall you,* no plague come | near your tent. 11For he will command his angels con- | cerning you* to guard you in | all your ways. 12On their hands they will | bear you up,* lest you strike your foot a- | gainst a stone. 13You will tread on the lion and the | adder;* the young lion and the serpent you will trample | underfoot. 14“Because he holds fast to me in love, I will de- | liver him;* I will protect him, because he | knows my name. 15When he calls to me, I will answer him; I will be with him in | trouble;* I will rescue him and | honor him. 16With long life I will sat- | isfy him* and show him my sal- | vation.”—Psalm 91:9–16
Additional Psalm: Psalm 97

## Old Testament Reading: Deuteronomy 5:22–6:9

[The Ten Commandments]

22“These words the LORD spoke to all your assembly at the mountain out of the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the thick darkness, with a loud voice; and he added no more. And he wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me. 23And as soon as you heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, you came near to me, all the heads of your tribes, and your elders. 24And you said, ‘Behold, the LORD our God has shown us his glory and greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire. This day we have seen God speak with man, and man still live. 25Now therefore why should we die? For this great fire will consume us. If we hear the voice of the LORD our God any more, we shall die. 26For who is there of all flesh, that has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of fire as we have, and has still lived? 27Go near and hear all that the LORD our God will say and speak to us all that the LORD our God will speak to you, and we will hear and do it.’ 28“And the LORD heard your words, when you spoke to me. And the LORD said to me, ‘I have heard the words of this people, which they have spoken to you. They are right in all that they have spoken. 29Oh that they had such a mind as this always, to fear me and to keep all my commandments, that it might go well with them and with their descendants forever! 30Go and say to them, “Return to your tents.” 31But you, stand here by me, and I will tell you the whole commandment and the statutes and the rules that you shall teach them, that they may do them in the land that I am giving them to possess.’ 32You shall be careful therefore to do as the LORD your God has commanded you. You shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left. 33You shall walk in all the way that the LORD your God has commanded you, that you may live, and that it may go well with you, and that you may live long in the land that you shall possess.

The Greatest Commandment

6:1“Now this is the commandment, the statutes and the rules that the LORD your God commanded me to teach you, that you may do them in the land to which you are going over, to possess it, 2that you may fear the LORD your God, you and your son and your son’s son, by keeping all his statutes and his commandments, which I command you, all the days of your life, and that your days may be long. 3Hear therefore, O Israel, and be careful to do them, that it may go well with you, and that you may multiply greatly, as the LORD, the God of your fathers, has promised you, in a land flowing with milk and honey. 4“Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one. 5You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might. 6And these words that I command you today shall be on your heart. 7You shall teach them diligently to your children, and shall talk of them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise. 8You shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes. 9You shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 9:1–17

Jesus Heals a Paralytic

1And getting into a boat he crossed over and came to his own city. 2And behold, some people brought to him a paralytic, lying on a bed. And when Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Take heart, my son; your sins are forgiven.” 3And behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This man is blaspheming.” 4But Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, “Why do you think evil in your hearts? 5For which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’? 6But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he then said to the paralytic—“Rise, pick up your bed and go home.” 7And he rose and went home. 8When the crowds saw it, they were afraid, and they glorified God, who had given such authority to men.

Jesus Calls Matthew

9As Jesus passed on from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax booth, and he said to him, “Follow me.” And he rose and followed him. 10And as Jesus reclined at table in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and were reclining with Jesus and his disciples. 11And when the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?” 12But when he heard it, he said, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. 13Go and learn what this means, ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice.’ For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.”

A Question About Fasting

14Then the disciples of John came to him, saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not fast?” 15And Jesus said to them, “Can the wedding guests mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? The days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast. 16No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, for the patch tears away from the garment, and a worse tear is made. 17Neither is new wine put into old wineskins. If it is, the skins burst and the wine is spilled and the skins are destroyed. But new wine is put into fresh wineskins, and so both are preserved.”

## Writing

The Lord’s Teaching to the Heathen by the Twelve Apostles: There are two ways, one of life and one of death; and between the two ways there is a great difference. Now, this is the way of life: “First, you must love God who made you, and second, your neighbor as yourself.” And whatever you want people to refrain from doing to you, you must not do to them. What these maxims teach is this: “Bless those who curse you,” and “pray for your enemies.” Moreover, fast “for those who persecute you.” For “what credit is it to you if you love those who love you? Is that not the way the heathen act?” But “you must love those who hate you,” and then you will make no enemies. “Abstain from carnal passions.” If someone strikes you “on the right cheek, turn to him the other too, and you will be perfect.” If someone “forces you to go one mile with him, go along with him for two”; if someone robs you “of your overcoat, give him your suit as well.” If someone deprives you of “your property, do not ask for it back.” (You could not get it back anyway!) “Give to everybody who begs from you, and ask for no return.” For the Father wants his own gifts to be universally shared. Happy is the man who gives as the commandment bids him, for he is guiltless!—Didache

## Hymnody

We deserve but grief and shame, Yet His words, rich grace revealing,
Pardon, peace, and life proclaim; Here our ills have perfect healing. Firmly
in these words believe: Jesus sinners doth receive.—Jesus Sinners Doth
Receive (LSB 609:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and most merciful God, You sent Your Son, Jesus Christ, to seek and to save the lost. Graciously open our ears and our hearts to hear His call and to follow Him by faith that we may feast with Him forever in His kingdom; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (A63)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XV (VIII) 22–30

[22] Paul writes to the Colossians that traditions have “an appearance of wisdom” (2:23). Indeed, they have. Good order is very fitting in the Church, and is for this reason necessary. Human reason, because it does not understand the righteousness of faith, naturally imagines that such works justify people because they reconcile God.

[23] Among the Israelites the common people thought this, and by this opinion increased such ceremonies. Among us ceremonies have grown in the monasteries.

[24] Human reason also thinks this about bodily exercises, such as fasts. Although the purpose of these bodily exercises is to hold the flesh in check, reason falsely adds that they are services that justify. As Thomas writes, “Fasting avails for the extinguishing and the prevention of guilt.” These are Thomas’s words. The look of wisdom and righteousness in such works tricks people. The examples of the saints are added. When people want to imitate these, they imitate, for the most part, the outward exercises. They do not imitate their faith.

[25] After this look of wisdom and righteousness has deceived people, then countless evils follow. The Gospel about the righteousness of faith in Christ is clouded over, and empty confidence in such works succeeds. Then God’s commandments are clouded over. These human works assume the title of a perfect and spiritual life. They are preferred more than the works of God’s commandments (works of one’s own calling, the administration of the state, the management of a family, married life, and the bringing up of children).

[26] Compared with those ceremonies, the latter are judged to be ungodly, so that they are exercised by many with doubting consciences. For it is known that many have left the administration of the state and married life to welcome these human ceremonies as better and holier.

[27] Nor is this enough. When the belief has possessed minds that such ceremonies are necessary for justification, consciences are in miserable anxiety because they cannot exactly perform all ceremonies. How many are there who could list all these ceremonies? There are immense books, indeed, whole libraries, containing not a syllable about Christ, about faith in Christ, about the good works of one’s own calling. They only collect the traditions and interpretations by which they are sometimes made quite strict and sometimes relaxed.

[28] How that most excellent man Gerson is tortured while he searches for the steps and extent of the rules! Yet, he is not able to fix mitigation (epieikeian) in a definite grade. Meanwhile, he deeply regrets the dangers to godly consciences that this strict interpretation of the traditions produces.

[29] Against this look of wisdom and righteousness in human rites, which tricks people, let us strengthen ourselves by God’s Word. Let us know, first of all, that these rites neither merit the forgiveness of sins or justification before God, nor are they necessary for justification.

[30] We have mentioned some testimonies above. Paul is full of them. To the Colossians he clearly says:

Therefore let no one pass judgment on you in questions of food and drink, or with regard to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath. These are a shadow of the things to come, but the substance belongs to Christ. (2:16–17)

Here he welcomes both Moses’ Law and human traditions at the same time, so that the adversaries may not dodge these testimonies, according to their custom, on the ground that Paul speaks only about Moses’ Law. He clearly testifies here that he is speaking of human traditions. However, the adversaries do not see what they are saying. If the Gospel says that Moses’ ceremonies—which were divinely instituted—do not justify, how much less do human traditions justify!
