# October 4

## Psalmody

1Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, you who lead Joseph | like a flock!* You who are enthroned upon the cherubim, | shine forth. 2Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Ma- | nasseh,* stir up your might and come to | save us! 3Restore us, | O God;* let your face shine, that we | may be saved! 4O LORD | God of hosts,* how long will you be angry with your | people’s prayers? 5You have fed them with the | bread of tears* and given them tears to drink in full | measure. 6You make us an object of contention for our | neighbors,* and our enemies laugh a- | mong themselves. 7Restore us, O | God of hosts;* let your face shine, that we | may be saved!
—Psalm 80:1–7
Additional Psalm: Psalm 80

## Old Testament Reading: Deuteronomy 4:21–40

[Idolatry Forbidden]

21“Furthermore, the LORD was angry with me because of you, and he swore that I should not cross the Jordan, and that I should not enter the good land that the LORD your God is giving you for an inheritance. 22For I must die in this land; I must not go over the Jordan. But you shall go over and take possession of that good land. 23Take care, lest you forget the covenant of the LORD your God, which he made with you, and make a carved image, the form of anything that the LORD your God has forbidden you. 24For the LORD your God is a consuming fire, a jealous God. 25“When you father children and children’s children, and have grown old in the land, if you act corruptly by making a carved image in the form of anything, and by doing what is evil in the sight of the LORD your God, so as to provoke him to anger, 26I call heaven and earth to witness against you today, that you will soon utterly perish from the land that you are going over the Jordan to possess. You will not live long in it, but will be utterly destroyed. 27And the LORD will scatter you among the peoples, and you will be left few in number among the nations where the LORDwill drive you.28And there you will serve gods of wood and stone, the work of human hands, that neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. 29But from there you will seek the LORD your God and you will find him, if you search after him with all your heart and with all your soul. 30When you are in tribulation, and all these things come upon you in the latter days, you will return to the LORD your God and obey his voice. 31For the LORD your God is a merciful God. He will not leave you or destroy you or forget the covenant with your fathers that he swore to them.

The LORD Alone Is God

32“For ask now of the days that are past, which were before you, since the day that God created man on the earth, and ask from one end of heaven to the other, whether such a great thing as this has ever happened or was ever heard of. 33Did any people ever hear the voice of a god speaking out of the midst of the fire, as you have heard, and still live? 34Or has any god ever attempted to go and take a nation for himself from the midst of another nation, by trials, by signs, by wonders, and by war, by a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, and by great deeds of terror, all of which the LORD your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes? 35To you it was shown, that you might know that the LORD is God; there is no other besides him. 36Out of heaven he let you hear his voice, that he might discipline you. And on earth he let you see his great fire, and you heard his words out of the midst of the fire. 37And because he loved your fathers and chose their offspring after them and brought you out of Egypt with his own presence, by his great power, 38driving out before you nations greater and mightier than yourselves, to bring you in, to give you their land for an inheritance, as it is this day, 39know therefore today, and lay it to your heart, that the LORD is God in heaven above and on the earth beneath; there is no other. 40Therefore you shall keep his statutes and his commandments, which I command you today, that it may go well with you and with your children after you, and that you may prolong your days in the land that the LORD your God is giving you for all time.”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 8:1–17

Jesus Cleanses a Leper

1When he came down from the mountain, great crowds followed him. 2And be-hold, a leper came to him and knelt before him, saying, “Lord, if you will, you can make me clean.” 3And Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, “I will; be clean.” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. 4And Jesus said to him, “See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a proof to them.”

The Faith of a Centurion

5When he entered Capernaum, a centurion came forward to him, appealing to him, 6“Lord, my servant is lying paralyzed at home, suffering terribly.” 7And he said to him, “I will come and heal him.” 8But the centurion replied, “Lord, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof, but only say the word, and my servant will be healed. 9For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. And I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes, and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” 10When Jesus heard this, he marveled and said to those who followed him, “Truly, I tell you, with no one in Israel have I found such faith. 11I tell you, many will come from east and west and recline at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, 12while the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” 13And to the centurion Jesus said, “Go; let it be done for you as you have believed.” And the servant was healed at that very moment.

Jesus Heals Many

14And when Jesus entered Peter’s house, he saw his mother-in-law lying sick with a fever. 15He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she rose and began to serve him. 16That evening they brought to him many who were oppressed by demons, and he cast out the spirits with a word and healed all who were sick. 17This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah: “He took our illnesses and bore our diseases.”

## Writing

I ask you to note how the centurion signified that Christ is able not only to overcome death as if it were a slave but is also able to command it as its master. For in saying, “‘Come,’ and he comes,” and “‘Go,’ and he goes,” the centurion expressed this: “If You should command my servant’s end not to come upon him, it will not come.” Do you see how the centurion believed? For what was later to be made known to all—that Christ has power over both death and life, and that He leads down to the gates of hell and brings up again—is already made clear here by the centurion… But nevertheless, though he has such great faith, he still accounted himself to be unworthy. Christ, however, signifying that the centurion was worthy to have Him enter into his house, did much greater things, marveling at him and acclaiming him and giving him more than he had asked. For he came indeed seeking for his servant bodily healing, but he went away, having received a kingdom. See how the saying had already been fulfilled, “Seek first the kingdom of heaven, and all these things shall be added to you.” For because the centurion showed great faith and lowliness of mind, Christ both gave him heaven, and added to him the health of his servant. And not by this alone did He honor him, but also by indicating upon whose casting out he is brought in. For now from this time forth, Christ proceeds to make known that salvation is by faith, not by works of the Law. And this is why not to Jews only but to Gentiles also the gift so given shall be proffered, and to the [faithful of the] latter, rather than to the [unbelieving of the] former.—John Chrysostom

## Hymnody

O be our great deliv’rer still, The Lord of life and death; Restore and
quicken, soothe and bless, With Your life-giving breath. To hands that work
and eyes that see Give wisdom’s healing pow’r That whole and sick and
weak and strong May praise You evermore.—Your Hand, O Lord, in Days
of Old (LSB 846:3)

## Prayer of the Day

O Lord, grant to Your faithful people pardon and peace that they may be cleansed from all their sins and serve You with a quiet mind; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (H80)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XV (VIII) 1–12

[1] In Article XV, the adversaries accept the first part, in which we say that ecclesiastical rites are to be kept that can be observed without sin and are beneficial in the Church for peace and good order. They completely condemn the second part, in which we say that human traditions (set up to reconcile God, to merit grace, and make satisfactions for sins) are contrary to the Gospel.

[2] In the Confession itself, we spoke long enough about traditions such as the distinction of meats. Yet certain things should be briefly reviewed here.

[3] We supposed that the adversaries would defend human traditions on other grounds. Yet we did not think that this would happen, that they would condemn this article: We do not merit the forgiveness of sins or grace by celebrating human traditions. Since this article has been condemned, we have an easy and straightforward case.

[4] The adversaries are now openly Judaizing [Acts 15:1]; they are openly hindering the Gospel by the doctrines of demons (1 Timothy 4:1). For Scripture calls traditions doctrines of demons when it is taught that religious rites serve to merit the forgiveness of sins and grace. For they are then clouding over the Gospel, Christ’s benefit, and the righteousness of faith.

[5] The Gospel teaches that through faith we receive freely, for Christ’s sake, the forgiveness of sins and are reconciled to God. The adversaries, on the other hand, appoint another mediator: these traditions. By these they want to gain forgiveness of sins; by these they want to reconcile God’s anger. But Christ clearly says, “In vain do they worship Me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men” (Matthew 15:9).

[6] We have already discussed at length that people are justified through faith when they believe that they have a reconciled God, not because of our works, but freely, for Christ’s sake. It is certain that this is the doctrine of the Gospel because Paul clearly teaches, “By grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, not a result of works” (Ephesians 2:8–9).

[7] Now these men say that people merit the forgiveness of sins by these human celebrations. What else is this than to appoint another justifier, a mediator other than Christ? Paul says to the Galatians,

[8] “You are severed from Christ, you who would be justified by the law” (5:4). This means, if you hold that by obeying the Law you merit righteousness before God, Christ will benefit you nothing. Why do they need Christ who hold that they are righteous by their obeying the Law?

[9] God has presented Christ with the promise that, because of this Mediator, and not because of our righteousness, He wishes to be gracious to us. But these men hold that God is reconciled and gracious because of the traditions, not because of Christ. Therefore, they take the honor of Mediator away from Christ.

[10] So far as this matter is concerned, there is not any difference between our traditions and Moses’ ceremonies. Paul condemns Moses’ ceremonies [Galatians 3:10–12], just as he condemns traditions, because they were regarded as works that merit righteousness before God. So the office of Christ and the righteousness of faith were clouded over. With the Law and traditions removed, he argues that the forgiveness of sins has been promised not because of our works, but freely, because of Christ, if only we receive it through faith. For the promise is not received except through faith.

[11] Since we receive the forgiveness of sins through faith, since we have a merciful God for Christ’s sake by faith, it is an error and sin to declare that we merit the forgiveness of sins because of these observances.

[12] If anyone should say that we do not merit the forgiveness of sins, but that those who have already been justified by these traditions merit grace, Paul again replies, “Christ [is] then a servant of sin” (Galatians 2:17). The same would be true if we were to hold that, after justification, we were not counted righteous for Christ’s sake, but we should first, by other observances, merit that we are counted righteous. Likewise, “Even with a man-made covenant, no one annuls it or adds to it once it has been ratified” (Galatians 3:15). We should not add to God’s covenant, for God promises that He will be merciful to us for Christ’s sake. Nor should we add that we must first get such merit in order to be regarded as accepted and righteous through these observances.
