# October 14

## Psalmody

1When Israel went out from | Egypt,* the house of Jacob from a people of strange | language, 2Judah became his sanctu- | ary,* Israel his do- | minion. 3The sea | looked and fled;* Jordan | turned back. 4The mountains | skipped like rams,* the | hills like lambs. 5What ails you, O sea, | that you flee?* O Jordan, that you | turn back? 6O mountains, that you | skip like rams?* O | hills, like lambs? 7Tremble, O earth, at the presence | of the Lord,* at the presence of the God of | Jacob, 8who turns the rock into a pool of | water,* the flint into a spring of | water.
—Psalm 114
Additional Psalm: Psalm 124

## Old Testament Reading: Deuteronomy 12:13–32

[The LORD’s Chosen Place of Worship]

13“Take care that you do not offer your burnt offerings at any place that you see, 14but at the place that the LORD will choose in one of your tribes, there you shall offer your burnt offerings, and there you shall do all that I am commanding you. 15“However, you may slaughter and eat meat within any of your towns, as much as you desire, according to the blessing of the LORD your God that he has given you. The unclean and the clean may eat of it, as of the gazelle and as of the deer. 16Only you shall not eat the blood; you shall pour it out on the earth like water. 17You may not eat within your towns the tithe of your grain or of your wine or of your oil, or the firstborn of your herd or of your flock, or any of your vow offerings that you vow, or your freewill offerings or the contribution that you present, 18but you shall eat them before the LORD your God in the place that the LORD your God will choose, you and your son and your daughter, your male servant and your female servant, and the Levite who is within your towns. And you shall rejoice before the LORD your God in all that you undertake. 19Take care that you do not neglect the Levite as long as you live in your land. 20“When the LORD your God enlarges your territory, as he has promised you, and you say, ‘I will eat meat,’ because you crave meat, you may eat meat whenever you desire. 21If the place that the LORD your God will choose to put his name there is too far from you, then you may kill any of your herd or your flock, which the LORD has given you, as I have commanded you, and you may eat within your towns whenever you desire. 22Just as the gazelle or the deer is eaten, so you may eat of it. The unclean and the clean alike may eat of it. 23Only be sure that you do not eat the blood, for the blood is the life, and you shall not eat the life with the flesh. 24You shall not eat it; you shall pour it out on the earth like water. 25You shall not eat it, that all may go well with you and with your children after you, when you do what is right in the sight of the LORD. 26But the holy things that are due from you, and your vow offerings, you shall take, and you shall go to the place that the LORD will choose, 27and offer your burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, on the altar of the LORD your God. The blood of your sacrifices shall be poured out on the altar of the LORD your God, but the flesh you may eat. 28Be careful to obey all these words that I command you, that it may go well with you and with your children after you forever, when you do what is good and right in the sight of the LORD your God.

Warning Against Idolatry

29“When the LORD your God cuts off before you the nations whom you go in to dispossess, and you dispossess them and dwell in their land, 30take care that you be not ensnared to follow them, after they have been destroyed before you, and that you do not inquire about their gods, saying, ‘How did these nations serve their gods?—that I also may do the same.’ 31You shall not worship the LORD your God in that way, for every abominable thing that the LORD hates they have done for their gods, for they even burn their sons and their daughters in the fire to their gods. 32“Everything that I command you, you shall be careful to do. You shall not add to it or take from it.”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 12:38–50

The Sign of Jonah

38Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying, “Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you.” 39But he answered them, “An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah. 40For just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. 41The men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here. 42The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here.

Return of an Unclean Spirit

43“When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it passes through waterless places seeking rest, but finds none. 44Then it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came.’ And when it comes, it finds the house empty, swept, and put in order. 45Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there, and the last state of that person is worse than the first. So also will it be with this evil generation.”

Jesus’ Mother and Brothers

46While he was still speaking to the people, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, asking to speak to him. 48But he replied to the man who told him, “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?” 49And stretching out his hand toward his disciples, he said, “Here are my mother and my brothers! 50For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”

## Writing

As far as the old Adam is concerned, which still clings to [believers], he must be driven not only by the Law, but also by punishments. Nevertheless, he does everything against his will and under coercion, no less than the godless are driven and held in obedience by the Law’s threats (1 Corinthians 9:27; Romans 7:18–19). This doctrine of the Law is needed by believers in order that they may not make up a holiness and devotion of their own. Using God’s Spirit as an excuse, they must not set up a self-chosen worship, without God’s Word and command. For it is written: “You shall not do according to … Whatever is right in [your] own eyes,” but “be careful to obey all these words that I command you,” “you shall not add to it or take from it.” (Deuteronomy 12:8, 28, 32) The doctrine of the Law is also necessary in and with ‹the use of› believers’ good works. Otherwise, a person can easily imagine that his work and life are entirely pure and perfect. But God’s Law prescribes good works to believers in this way: it shows and indicates at the same time, as in a mirror, that in this life works are still imperfect and impure in us. So we must say with the beloved Paul, “I am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not thereby acquitted” [1 Corinthians 4:4]. So Paul, when encouraging the regenerate to do good works, clearly presents to them the Ten Commandments (Romans 13:9). He recognizes from the Law that his good works are imperfect and impure (Romans 7:7–13). And David declares: I will run in the way of Your commandments. (Psalm 119:32) [But] enter not into judgment with Your servant, for no one living is righteous before You. (Psalm 143:2)—Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VI 19–21

## Hymnody

For us He prayed; for us He taught; For us His daily works He wrought, By
words and signs and actions thus Still seeking not Himself but us.—O
Love, How Deep (LSB 544:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Blessed Lord, since You have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our learning, grant that we may so hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them that we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (A68)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXI (IX) 1–13

[1] They absolutely condemn Article XXI because we do not require the invocation of saints. On no other topic do they speak more smoothly or wordily. Yet they are not able to prove anything other than that the saints should be honored, or that living saints pray for others, as though invoking dead saints were necessary for that reason.

[2] They cite Cyprian because he asked Cornelius, while he was still alive, to pray for his brothers after his death. By this example they prove the invocation of the dead. They quote also Jerome against Vigilantius. “On this field,” they say, “eleven hundred years ago, Jerome overcame Vigilantius.” So the adversaries triumph, as though the war had already ended. Nor do those asses see that in Jerome, against Vigilantius, there is not a syllable about invocation. He speaks about honors for the saints, not about invocation.

[3] Before Gregory, none of the other ancient writers mentioned invocation. Certainly this kind of invocation, and the opinions that the adversaries now teach about the application of merits, are not confirmed by the ancient writers.

[4] Our Confession approves honoring the saints in three ways. The first is thanksgiving. We should thank God because He has shown examples of mercy, because He wishes to save people, and because He has given teachers and other gifts to the Church. These gifts, since they are the greatest, should be amplified. The saints themselves, who have faithfully used these gifts, should be praised just as Christ praises faithful businessmen (Matthew 25:21, 23).

[5] The second service is the strengthening of our faith. When we see Peter’s denial forgiven, we also are encouraged to believe all the more that grace truly superabounds over sin (Romans 5:20).

[6] The third honor is the imitation, first of faith, then of the other virtues. Everyone should imitate the saints according to his calling.

[7] The adversaries do not require these true honors. They argue only about invocation, which, even if it were not dangerous, still is not necessary.

[8] Besides, we also grant that the angels pray for us. For there is a passage in Zechariah 1:12, where an angel prays, “O LORD of hosts, how long will You have no mercy on Jerusalem?”

[9] We admit that, just as the saints (when alive) pray for the Church universal in general, so in heaven they pray for the Church in general. However, no passage about the praying of the dead exists in the Scriptures, except the dream taken from the Second Book of Maccabees (15:14).

[10] Furthermore, even if the saints do pray for the Church, that does not mean they should be invoked. Our Confession affirms only this: Scripture does not teach the invocation of the saints, or that we are to ask the saints for aid. Since neither a command nor a promise nor an example can be produced from the Scriptures about the invocation of saints, it makes sense that conscience remains uncertain about this invocation. Since prayer should be made from faith, how do we know that God approves this invocation? Without the testimony of Scripture, how do we know that the saints know about the prayers of each one?

[11] Some plainly ascribe divinity to the saints, namely, that they discern the silent thoughts of our minds. They argue about morning and evening knowledge, perhaps because they doubt whether the saints hear us in the morning or the evening. They invent these things, not to honor the saints, but to defend profitable services.

[12] The adversaries cannot produce anything against this argument. Since the invocation of saints does not have a testimony from God’s Word, it cannot be affirmed that the saints understand our invocation or, even if they understand it, that God approves it.

[13] Therefore, the adversaries should not force us into an uncertain matter, because a prayer without faith is not prayer. For when they cite the Church’s example, it is clear that this is a new custom in the Church. Although the old prayers mention the saints, they do not invoke the saints. This new invocation in the Church is unlike the invocation of individuals.
