# October 27

## Psalmody

1May the LORD answer you in the day of | trouble!* May the name of the God of Jacob pro- | tect you! 2May he send you help from the sanctu- | ary* and give you support from | Zion! 3May he remember all your | offerings* and regard with favor your burnt sacri- | fices! 4May he grant you your | heart’s desire* and fulfill | all your plans! 5May we shout for joy over your salvation, and in the name of our God set up our | banners!* May the LORD fulfill all your pe- | titions! 6Now I know that the LORD saves his a- | nointed;* he will answer him from his holy heaven with the saving might of his | right hand. 7Some trust in chariots and some in | horses,* but we trust in the name of the | LORD our God. 8They col- | lapse and fall,* but we rise and | stand upright. 9O LORD, | save the king!* May he answer us | when we call.—Psalm 20
Additional Psalm: Psalm 25

## Old Testament Reading: Deuteronomy 29:1–29

The Covenant Renewed in Moab

1These are the words of the covenant that the LORD commanded Moses to make with the people of Israel in the land of Moab, besides the covenant that he had made with them at Horeb. 2And Moses summoned all Israel and said to them: “You have seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to all his land, 3the great trials that your eyes saw, the signs, and those great wonders. 4But to this day the LORD has not given you a heart to understand or eyes to see or ears to hear. 5I have led you forty years in the wilderness. Your clothes have not worn out on you, and your sandals have not worn off your feet. 6You have not eaten bread, and you have not drunk wine or strong drink, that you may know that I am the LORD your God. 7And when you came to this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon and Og the king of Bashan came out against us to battle, but we defeated them. 8We took their land and gave it for an inheritance to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of the Manassites. 9Therefore keep the words of this covenant and do them, that you may prosper in all that you do. 10“You are standing today all of you before the LORD your God: the heads of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, all the men of Israel, 11your little ones, your wives, and the sojourner who is in your camp, from the one who chops your wood to the one who draws your water, 12so that you may enter into the sworn covenant of the LORD your God, which the LORD your God is making with you today, 13that he may establish you today as his people, and that he may be your God, as he promised you, and as he swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. 14It is not with you alone that I am making this sworn covenant, 15but with whoever is standing here with us today before the LORD our God, and with whoever is not here with us today. 16“You know how we lived in the land of Egypt, and how we came through the midst of the nations through which you passed. 17And you have seen their detestable things, their idols of wood and stone, of silver and gold, which were among them. 18Beware lest there be among you a man or woman or clan or tribe whose heart is turning away today from the LORD our God to go and serve the gods of those nations. Beware lest there be among you a root bearing poisonous and bitter fruit, 19one who, when he hears the words of this sworn covenant, blesses himself in his heart, saying, ‘I shall be safe, though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart.’ This will lead to the sweeping away of moist and dry alike. 20The LORD will not be willing to forgive him, but rather the anger of the LORD and his jealousy will smoke against that man, and the curses written in this book will settle upon him, and the LORD will blot out his name from under heaven. 21And the LORD will single him out from all the tribes of Israel for calamity, in accordance with all the curses of the covenant written in this Book of the Law. 22And the next generation, your children who rise up after you, and the foreigner who comes from a far land, will say, when they see the afflictions of that land and the sicknesses with which the LORD has made it sick—23the whole land burned out with brimstone and salt, nothing sown and nothing growing, where no plant can sprout, an overthrow like that of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim, which the LORD overthrew in his anger and wrath—24all the nations will say, ‘Why has the LORD done thus to this land? What caused the heat of this great anger?’ 25Then people will say, ‘It is because they abandoned the covenant of the LORD, the God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt, 26and went and served other gods and worshiped them, gods whom they had not known and whom he had not allotted to them. 27Therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against this land, bringing upon it all the curses written in this book, 28and the LORD uprooted them from their land in anger and fury and great wrath, and cast them into another land, as they are this day.’ 29“The secret things belong to the LORD our God, but the things that are revealed belong to us and to our children forever, that we may do all the words of this law.”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 18:21–35

The Parable of the Unforgiving Servant

21Then Peter came up and said to him, “Lord, how often will my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? As many as seven times?” 22Jesus said to him, “I do not say to you seven times, but seventy times seven. 23“Therefore the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants. 24When he began to settle, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents. 25And since he could not pay, his master ordered him to be sold, with his wife and children and all that he had, and payment to be made. 26So the servant fell on his knees, imploring him, ‘Have patience with me, and I will pay you everything.’ 27And out of pity for him, the master of that servant released him and forgave him the debt. 28But when that same servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred denarii, and seizing him, he began to choke him, saying, ‘Pay what you owe.’ 29So his fellow servant fell down and pleaded with him, ‘Have patience with me, and I will pay you.’ 30He refused and went and put him in prison until he should pay the debt. 31When his fellow servants saw what had taken place, they were greatly distressed, and they went and reported to their master all that had taken place. 32Then his master summoned him and said to him, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt because you pleaded with me. 33And should not you have had mercy on your fellow servant, as I had mercy on you?’ 34And in anger his master delivered him to the jailers, until he should pay all his debt. 35So also my heavenly Father will do to every one of you, if you do not forgive your brother from your heart.”

## Writing

If the mass is a promise, as has been said, then access to it is to be gained, not with any works, or powers, or merits of one’s own, but by faith alone. For where there is the Word of the promising God, there must necessarily be the faith of the accepting man. It is plain therefore, that the beginning of our salvation is a faith which clings to the Word of the promising God, who, without any effort on our part, in free and unmerited mercy takes the initiative and offers us the word of his promise. “He sent forth his word, and thus [sic] healed them,” not: “He accepted our work, and thus healed us.” First of all there is God’s Word. After it follows faith; after faith, love; then love does every good work, for it does no wrong, indeed, it is the fulfilling of the law [Rom. 13:10]. In no other way can man come to God or deal with him than through faith. That is to say, that the author of salvation is not man, by any works of his own, but God, through his promise; and that all things depend on, and are upheld and preserved by, the word of his power [Heb. 1:3], through which he brought us forth, to be a kind of first fruits of his creatures [Jas. 1:18].—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

Forgive our sins, Lord, we implore, That they may trouble us no more; We,
too, will gladly those forgive Who hurt us by the way they live. Help us in
our community To serve each other willingly.—Our Father, Who from
Heaven Above (LSB 766:6)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, our refuge and strength, the author of all godliness, hear the devout prayers of Your Church, especially in times of persecution, and grant that what we ask in faith we may obtain; through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (A77)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXIII (XI) 60–71

[60] We have explained why we cannot with a good conscience agree with the adversaries when they defend the pontifical law about permanent celibacy. It conflicts with divine and natural law, and it varies from the canons themselves. It is superstitious and full of danger. Finally, the whole affair is insincere. For the law is enacted not for the sake of religion. It was enacted for the sake of control, and this is wickedly given the appearance of religion. No sane person can produce anything against these most firmly established reasons.

[61] The Gospel allows marriage for those to whom it is necessary. Nevertheless, it does not compel marriage for those who can be chaste, provided they are truly chaste. We hold that the priests should be allowed this freedom also. We do not wish to compel anyone to be celibate by force, nor do we want to break up marriages that have been contracted.

[62] We have also shown on the side how the adversaries object to several of our arguments while we presented them. We have explained away these false accusations. As briefly as possible, we will now relate what important reasons they claim to have for defending the law.

[63] First, they say that it has been revealed by God. You see the extreme rudeness of these sorry fellows. They dare to affirm that the law of permanent celibacy has been divinely revealed, although it is contrary to clear Scripture passages. These passages command that “because of the temptation to sexual immorality, each man should have his own wife” (1 Corinthians 7:2). Likewise, they forbid breaking up marriages that have been contracted. (See Matthew 5:32; 19:6; 1 Corinthians 7:27.) Paul reminds us what kind of author such a law has when he calls it “teachings of demons” (1 Timothy 4:1). Fruit show their author; many monstrous lusts and murders are now committed under the appearance of that law.

[64] The second argument of the adversaries is that the priests should be pure, according to Isaiah 52:11, “Purify yourselves, you who bear the vessels of the LORD.” And they cite many things to this effect. We have dealt with this particularly false reason before. We have said that virginity without faith is not purity before God, and marriage is pure because of faith, according to Titus 1:15, “To the pure, all things are pure.” We have also said that outward purity and the ceremonies of the Law are not to be demanded today, because the Gospel requires purity of heart. A husband’s heart, as in the case of polygamists Abraham or Jacob, may be purer and burn less with lusts than that of many virgins who are truly chaste. What Isaiah says, “Purify yourselves, you who bear the vessels of the LORD,” should be understood as referring to the cleanness of heart and to the whole of repentance.

[65] Besides, in the exercise of marriage the saints will know to what extent it is beneficial to restrain its use, and as Paul says, “to control his own body in holiness” (1 Thessalonians 4:4).

[66] Finally, since marriage is pure, those who are not chaste in celibacy are rightly told that they should marry wives to be pure. So the same law, “Purify yourselves, you who bear the vessels of the LORD,” commands that impure celibates become pure husbands.

[67] The third argument is horrible: the marriage of priests is the heresy of Jovinian. Fine-sounding words! This is a new crime, that marriage is a heresy! In the time of Jovinian the world did not as yet know the law about permanent celibacy. Therefore, it is a rude lie that the marriage of priests is the heresy of Jovinian, or that such marriage was then condemned by the Church.

[68] In such passages we can see what plan the adversaries had in writing the Confutation. They determined that the ignorant would be the most easily excited if they would hear frequently the charge of heresy, and if they pretend that our cause had been condemned and executed by many previous decisions of the Church. So they frequently cite falsely the Church’s judgment. Because they knew about this, they were unwilling to show us a copy of their Apology, lest this lie and these charges be exposed.

[69] We have already expressed our opinion, however, regarding Jovinian, which concerns the comparison of virginity and marriage. We do not make marriage and virginity equal, although neither virginity nor marriage merits justification.

[70] The adversaries defend a law that is godless and destructive to good morals by such false arguments. By such reasons they set the minds of princes firmly against God’s judgment. God will call them to explain why they have broken apart marriages and why they have tortured and killed priests. For do not doubt that, as the blood of dead Abel cried out (Genesis 4:10), so the blood of many good men, whom they have unjustly attacked, will also cry out. God will punish this cruelty. There you will discover how worthless are these reasons of the adversaries. You will discern that in God’s judgment no lies against God’s Word remain standing, as Isaiah says, “All flesh is grass, and all its beauty is like the flower of the field” (40:6).

[71] Whatever may happen, our princes will be able to comfort themselves with the consciousness of right counsels. Even if the priests had done wrong in contracting marriages, this disruption of marriages, these prohibitions, and this cruelty are clearly contrary to God’s will and Word. Neither novelty nor dissent delights our princes. Especially in an undoubted matter more regard had to be paid to God’s Word than to anything else.

## EDITORIAL EXCURSUS: THE DIVINE SERVICE

Unlike other reformers, Luther’s revisions to the medieval Roman Mass were quite conservative. Calvin and Zwingli threw out all traditional services; enthusiasts substituted spiritualism for Word and Sacrament. But for Luther, true reform did not equal total rejection. He restored the Gospel to its proper place in the life of the Church and purged the liturgy of false teaching and practice. Below, compare the medieval Mass with Luther’s Divine Service for the Church at Wittenberg. Other than the unscriptural Canon of the Mass, the two services are strikingly similar.

## Luther’s Form of the Mass, 1523

1. Introit

2. Kyrie, “Lord have mercy upon us.”

3. Gloria, “Glory be . . .” (may be omitted)

4. Collect (only one permitted)

5. Epistle

6. Gradual/Alleluia

7. Sequences (only one of three permitted)

8. Gospel (candles and incense optional)

9. Nicene Creed (may be sung)

10. Sermon

11. Order for Holy Communion

a. Sursum Corda, “The Lord be with you . . .” and Preface

b. Words of Institution (preferably sung)

c. Sanctus, “Holy, Holy, Holy . . .” and Benedictus, “Blessed is He who comes . . .” (with elevation of body and blood)

d. Lord’s Prayer

e. Pax, “The peace of the Lord . . .”

f. Agnus Dei, “Lamb of God . . .” (sung by choir during administration)

g. Communion (antiphonal Psalm, during which priest communes first, then people)

h. Benedicamus, “Let us bless the Lord” (optional Alleluia in place of “Ite missa est,” “Go; it is the dismissal”)

i. Aaronic Benediction, “The Lord bless you and keep you . . .”

## Medieval Roman Mass

1. Introit

2. Kyrie

3. Gloria (may be omitted)

4. Collects

5. Epistle

6. Gradual/Alleluia

7. Sequences (all but four later rejected by Council of Trent)

8. Gospel/Sermon

9. Nicene Creed

10. Offertory and Secret (inaudible prayer; only conclusion heard)

11. Order for Holy Communion

a. Sursum Corda and Preface

b. Sanctus and Benedictus

c. Canon of the Mass (numerous prayers referencing the Mass as a sacrifice for the living and dead; commemoration of angels and saints; numerous genuflections and sign of the cross; includes Words of Institution)

d. Lord’s Prayer

e. Pax

f. Agnus Dei

g. Communion

h. Post-Communion prayer (and Benedicamus when Gloria is omitted at beginning of service)

i. Deacon: “Ite missa est.” Response: “Thanks be to God.”
