# October 30

## Psalmody

7For we are brought to an end by your | anger;* by your wrath we | are dismayed. 8You have set our iniquities be- | fore you,* our secret sins in the light of your | presence. 9For all our days pass away un- | der your wrath;* we bring our years to an end | like a sigh. 10The years of our life are seventy, or even by reason of strength | eighty;* yet their span is but toil and trouble; they are soon gone, and we | fly away. 11Who considers the power of your | anger,* and your wrath according to the | fear of you? 12So teach us to number | our days* that we may get a heart of | wisdom. 13Return, O LORD! | How long?* Have pity on your | servants! 14Satisfy us in the morning with your | steadfast love,* that we may rejoice and be glad | all our days. 15Make us glad for as many days as you have af- | flicted us,* and for as many years as we have seen | evil. 16Let your work be shown to your | servants,* and your glorious power to their | children. 17Let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish the work of ourhands up- | on us;* yes, establish the work | of our hands!—Psalm 90:7– 17
Additional Psalm: Psalm 90

## Old Testament Reading: Deuteronomy 31:30–32:27

The Song of Moses

30Then Moses spoke the words of this song until they were finished, in the ears of all the assembly of Israel: 32:1“Give ear, O heavens, and I will speak, and let the earth hear the words of my mouth. 2May my teaching drop as the rain, my speech distill as the dew, like gentle rain upon the tender grass, and like showers upon the herb. 3For I will proclaim the name of the LORD; ascribe greatness to our God! 4“The Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and upright is he. 5They have dealt corruptly with him; they are no longer his children because they are blemished; they are a crooked and twisted generation. 6Do you thus repay the LORD, you foolish and senseless people? Is not he your father, who created you, who made you and established you? 7Remember the days of old; consider the years of many generations; ask your father, and he will show you, your elders, and they will tell you. 8When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance, when he divided mankind, he fixed the borders of the peoples according to the number of the sons of God. 9But the LORD’s portion is his people, Jacob his allotted heritage. 10“He found him in a desert land, and in the howling waste of the wilderness; he encircled him, he cared for him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. 11Like an eagle that stirs up its nest, that flutters over its young, spreading out its wings, catching them, bearing them on its pinions, 12the LORD alone guided him, no foreign god was with him. 13He made him ride on the high places of the land, and he ate the produce of the field, and he suckled him with honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock. 14Curds from the herd, and milk from the flock, with fat of lambs, rams of Bashan and goats, with the very finest of the wheat—and you drank foaming wine made from the blood of the grape. 15“But Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked; you grew fat, stout, and sleek; then he forsook God who made him and scoffed at the Rock of his salvation. 16They stirred him to jealousy with strange gods; with abominations they provoked him to anger. 17They sacrificed to demons that were no gods, to gods they had never known, to new gods that had come recently, whom your fathers had never dreaded. 18You were unmindful of the Rock that bore you, and you forgot the God who gave you birth. 19“The LORD saw it and spurned them, because of the provocation of his sons and his daughters. 20And he said, ‘I will hide my face from them; I will see what their end will be, For they are a perverse generation, children in whom is no faithfulness. 21They have made me jealous with what is no god; they have provoked me to anger with their idols. So I will make them jealous with those who are no people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation. 22For a fire is kindled by my anger, and it burns to the depths of Sheol, devours the earth and its increase, and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains. 23“‘And I will heap disasters upon them; I will spend my arrows on them; 24they shall be wasted with hunger, and devoured by plague and poisonous pestilence; I will send the teeth of beasts against them, with the venom of things that crawl in the dust. 25Outdoors the sword shall bereave, and indoors terror, for young man and woman alike, the nursing child with the man of gray hairs. 26I would have said, “I will cut them to pieces; I will wipe them from human memory,” 27had I not feared provocation by the enemy, lest their adversaries should misunderstand, lest they should say, “Our hand is triumphant, it was not the LORD who did all this.”’”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 20:1–16

Laborers in the Vineyard

1[Jesus said,] “For the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard. 2After agreeing with the laborers for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard. 3And going out about the third hour he saw others standing idle in the marketplace, 4and to them he said, ‘You go into the vineyard too, and whatever is right I will give you.’ 5So they went. Going out again about the sixth hour and the ninth hour, he did the same. 6And about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing. And he said to them, ‘Why do you stand here idle all day?’ 7They said to him, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You go into the vineyard too.’ 8And when evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Call the laborers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last, up to the first.’ 9And when those hired about the eleventh hour came, each of them received a denarius. 10Now when those hired first came, they thought they would receive more, but each of them also received a denarius. 11And on receiving it they grumbled at the master of the house, 12saying, ‘These last worked only one hour, and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat.’ 13But he replied to one of them, ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Did you not agree with me for a denarius? 14Take what belongs to you and go. I choose to give to this last worker as I give to you. 15Am I not allowed to do what I choose with what belongs to me? Or do you begrudge my generosity?’ 16So the last will be first, and the first last.”

## Writing

This Gospel cannot be praised enough because of its kindness, for it is extraordinar-ily comforting to repentant and humble hearts, who desire to be saved. This is the center: Let no one doubt; our salvation does not consist in our good works but only and merely on the fact that the heavenly Father is so kind. Our salvation is based simply on the mercy, grace, and kindness of the heavenly Father, which the Lord Jesus earned on the cross with His bloody, sour work… But this text is also very frightening to all puffed-up, proud spirits, whose hearts are swollen up in arrogance like an oven, and who build on their own holiness.… In this Gospel there are three words that are the foundational pillars on which the whole building of this text rests: First, there is the “vineyard.” Into the vineyard one must go and not stand idly in the worldly sin-market. Second, it speaks of the “work.” This must be done, whether it is much or little. Idle grape-gorgers do not belong in the vineyard. Third, it mentions the loving heart of the heavenly Father, who is so kind. In distress and death, one must comfort himself with Him alone, for by our works we are lost. We merit only pure wrath. Pay attention to these three pages and the entire Gospel will become light and clear for you, for the goal and purpose of the Gospel is not directed to who gets the coin (as some people have broken their heads on this question yet have only been made worse) but to the question of who retains the grace of the heavenly Father, who is so kind.
—Valerius Herberger

## Hymnody

By grace! None dare lay claim to merit; Our works and conduct have no
worth. God in His love sent our Redeemer, Christ Jesus, to this sinful earth;
His death did for our sins atone, And we are saved by grace alone.—By
Grace I’m Saved (LSB 566:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, since we cannot stand before You relying on anything we have done, help us trust in Your abiding grace and live according to Your Word; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (A78)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXIV (XII) 16–21
