# November 9

## Psalmody

1Praise the LORD! For it is good to sing praises | to our God;* for it is pleasant, and a song of praise is | fitting. 2The LORD builds up Je- | rusalem;* he gathers the outcasts of | Israel. 3He heals the broken- | hearted* and binds | up their wounds. 4He determines the number | of the stars;* he gives to all of | them their names. 5Great is our Lord, and abun- | dant in power;* his understanding is beyond | measure. 6The LORD lifts up the | humble;* he casts the wicked | to the ground. 7Sing to the LORD with thanks- | giving;* make melody to our God | on the lyre! 8He covers the heavens with clouds; he prepares rain | for the earth;* he makes grass grow | on the hills. 9He gives to the | beasts their food,* and to the young ravens | that cry. 10His delight is not in the strength | of the horse,* nor his pleasure in the legs | of a man, 11but the LORD takes pleasure in those who | fear him,* in those who hope in his | steadfast love.—Psalm 147:1–11
Additional Psalm: Psalm 147

## Old Testament Reading: Jeremiah 22:1–23

[Message to the House of David]

1Thus says the LORD: “Go down to the house of the king of Judah and speak there this word, 2and say, ‘Hear the word of the LORD, O king of Judah, who sits on the throne of David, you, and your servants, and your people who enter these gates. 3Thus says the LORD: Do justice and righteousness, and deliver from the hand of the oppressor him who has been robbed. And do no wrong or violence to the resident alien, the fatherless, and the widow, nor shed innocent blood in this place. 4For if you will indeed obey this word, then there shall enter the gates of this house kings who sit on the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they and their servants and their people. 5But if you will not obey these words, I swear by myself, declares the LORD, that this house shall become a desolation. 6For thus says the LORD concerning the house of the king of Judah: “‘You are like Gilead to me, like the summit of Lebanon, yet surely I will make you a desert, an uninhabited city. 7I will prepare destroyers against you, each with his weapons, and they shall cut down your choicest cedars and cast them into the fire. 8“‘And many nations will pass by this city, and every man will say to his neighbor, “Why has the LORD dealt thus with this great city?” 9And they will answer, “Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD their God and worshiped other gods and served them.”’” 10Weep not for him who is dead, nor grieve for him, but weep bitterly for him who goes away, for he shall return no more to see his native land.

Message to the Sons of Josiah

11For thus says the LORD concerning Shallum the son of Josiah, king of Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah his father, and who went away from this place: “He shall return here no more, 12but in the place where they have carried him captive, there shall he die, and he shall never see this land again.” 13“Woe to him who builds his house by unrighteousness, and his upper rooms by injustice, who makes his neighbor serve him for nothing and does not give him his wages, 14who says, ‘I will build myself a great house with spacious upper rooms,’ who cuts out windows for it, paneling it with cedar and painting it with vermilion. 15Do you think you are a king because you compete in cedar? Did not your father eat and drink and do justice and righteousness? Then it was well with him. 16He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well. Is not this to know me? declares the LORD. 17But you have eyes and heart only for your dishonest gain, for shedding innocent blood, and for practicing oppression and violence.” 18Therefore thus says the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah: “They shall not lament for him, saying, ‘Ah, my brother!’ or ‘Ah, sister!’ They shall not lament for him, saying, ‘Ah, lord!’ or ‘Ah, his majesty!’ 19With the burial of a donkey he shall be buried, dragged and dumped beyond the gates of Jerusalem.” 20“Go up to Lebanon, and cry out, and lift up your voice in Bashan; cry out from Abarim, for all your lovers are destroyed. 21I spoke to you in your prosperity, but you said, ‘I will not listen.’ This has been your way from your youth, that you have not obeyed my voice. 22The wind shall shepherd all your shepherds, and your lovers shall go into captivity; then you will be ashamed and confounded because of all your evil. 23O inhabitant of Lebanon, nested among the cedars, how you will be pitied when pangs come upon you, pain as of a woman in labor!”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 25:1–13

The Parable of the Ten Virgins

1[Jesus said,] “Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went to meet the bridegroom. 2Five of them were foolish, and five were wise. 3For when the foolish took their lamps, they took no oil with them, 4but the wise took flasks of oil with their lamps. 5As the bridegroom was delayed, they all became drowsy and slept. 6But at midnight there was a cry, ‘Here is the bridegroom! Come out to meet him.’ 7Then all those virgins rose and trimmed their lamps. 8And the foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’ 9But the wise answered, saying, ‘Since there will not be enough for us and for you, go rather to the dealers and buy for yourselves.’ 10And while they were going to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. 11Afterward the other virgins came also, saying, ‘Lord, lord, open to us.’ 12But he answered, ‘Truly, I say to you, I do not know you.’ 13Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour.”

## Writing

[“But deliver us from evil.”] We are taught in the petition to lift up our heads, to think upon, and to desire the blessed life to come. This life is eternal where there will be full deliverance from all evil. Because we are too occupied and immersed in the matters and affairs of this world and of this life, we also request that God would inspire, excite, kindle, generate, and preserve in us this thought and desire. The death of the godly is their deliverance from all evil and a beginning of everlasting happiness. Therefore, when we say, “Deliver us from evil,” we desire that our heavenly Father would keep us from an evil death. We ask for His deliverance so that we may not die … the death of sinners… We ask that we may not die carelessly in our sins, unprepared without repentance (John 8:24), but that He would grant us a godly and saving end of this life. We ask to die in the Lord (Rev. 14:13).… Furthermore, we pray that God would put into us a concern and desire to prepare ourselves in advance for those things that are necessary to be properly prepared for death. This is done so that we may be prepared for death, because we do not want to be like those who do not have oil in their lamps when the bridegroom comes and calls us (Matt. 25:3). We ask that in the last hour of this life we may have true repentance, the Word, the Sacraments, faith, hope, and the spirit of grace and prayer. These things we ask so that when we are to die, we may be found in Christ… In this we rightly commend our souls into the hands of our Father. If we are found improperly prepared, we pray that He would not allow this to happen by a sudden unannounced death, but would mercifully grant us time for such preparation. We ask that our death may be a deliverance from all evil and a passage out of this vale of misery to eternal life.—Martin Chemnitz

## Hymnody

“Wake, awake, for night is flying,” The watchmen on the heights are crying;
“Awake, Jerusalem, arise!” Midnight hears the welcome voices And at the
thrilling cry rejoices: “Oh, where are ye, ye virgins wise? The Bridegroom
comes, awake! Your lamps with gladness take! Alleluia! With bridal care
Yourselves prepare To meet the Bridegroom, who is near.”—Wake, Awake,
for Night Is Flying (LSB 516:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, through the teaching of Martin Chemnitz, You prepare us for the coming of Your Son to lead home His Bride, the Church, that with all the company of the redeemed we may finally enter into His eternal wedding feast; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1106) Martin Chemnitz, Pastor and Confessor Aside from Martin Luther, Martin Chemnitz (1522–86) is regarded as the most important theologian in the history of the Lutheran Church. Chemnitz combined a penetrating intellect and an almost encyclopedic knowledge of Scripture and the Church Fathers with a genuine love for the Church. When various doctrinal disagreements broke out after Luther’s death in 1546, Chemnitz determined to give himself fully to the restoration of unity in the Lutheran Church. He became the leading spirit and principal author of the 1577 Formula of Concord, which settled the doctrinal disputes on the basis of Scripture and largely succeeded in restoring unity among Lutherans. Chemnitz also authored the four volume Examination of the Council of Trent (1565–73), in which he rigorously subjected the teachings of this Roman Catholic Council to the judgment of Scripture and the ancient Church Fathers. The Examination became the definitive Lutheran answer to the Council of Trent, as well as a thorough exposition of the faith of the Augsburg Confession. A theologian and a churchman, Chemnitz was truly a gift of God to the Church.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXIV (XII) 89–95

[89] Our adversaries have no references and no command from Scripture for defending the use of the ceremony for freeing the souls of the dead. Yet they receive unlimited revenue from this. Certainly it is no light sin to establish such services in the Church without God’s command and without the example of Scripture and to apply the Lord’s Supper to the dead. (It was set up for commemoration and preaching among the living.) This violates the Second Commandment by abusing God’s name.

First, it dishonors the Gospel to hold that a ceremony by the outward act (ex opere operato), without faith, is a sacrifice reconciling God and making satisfaction for sins. It is a horrible saying to assign as much importance to the work of a priest as to Christ’s death. Again, sin and death cannot be overcome except by faith in Christ, as Paul teaches, “Since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God” (Romans 5:1). Therefore, the punishment of purgatory cannot be overcome by applying to one person the work of another.

[90] Now we will leave out the sort of references about purgatory that the adversaries have, what kinds of punishments they think there are in purgatory, what grounds the doctrine of satisfactions has, which we have shown above to be most empty. We will only present the following in opposition. Certainly the Lord’s Supper was set up because of the pardon of guilt. It offers the forgiveness of sins, where it is necessary that guilt be truly understood. Yet, it does not make satisfaction for guilt; otherwise, the Mass would be equal to Christ’s death. The pardon of guilt can be received only through faith. Therefore, the Mass is not a satisfaction, but a promise and Sacrament that require faith.

[91] Certainly all godly persons should be seized with the bitterest grief if they consider that the greater portion of the Mass has been transferred to the dead and to satisfactions for punishments. This banishes the daily sacrifice from the Church. This is the kingdom of Antiochus, who transferred the most beneficial promises about the pardon of guilt and about faith to the emptiest opinions about satisfactions. This pollutes the Gospel and corrupts the use of the Sacraments. Paul said that these persons are “guilty of profaning the body and blood of the Lord” (1 Corinthians 11:27). They have hindered the doctrine about faith and the forgiveness of sins and, under the appearance of satisfactions, have devoted the Lord’s body and blood to sacrilegious profit. At some time they will pay the penalty for this sacrilege. Therefore, we and all godly consciences should guard against approving the abuses of the adversaries.

[92] Let us return to the matter. The Mass is not a satisfaction, either for punishment or for guilt, without faith (ex opere operato). Therefore, applying it to the dead is useless. There is no need here of a longer discussion. Clearly these applications for the dead have no references from the Scriptures. Neither is it safe, without the authority of Scripture, to set up forms of worship in the Church. If it is ever necessary, we will speak at greater length about this entire subject. Why should we now argue with adversaries who misunderstand sacrifice, Sacrament, the forgiveness of sins, and faith?

[93] The Greek canon does not apply the offering as a satisfaction for the dead because it applies it equally for all the blessed patriarchs, prophets, and apostles. Apparently the Greeks make an offering as thanksgiving and do not apply it as satisfaction for punishments. Furthermore, they do not speak of offering solely the Lord’s body and blood, but of the other parts of the Mass, namely, prayers and thanksgiving. After the consecration they pray that it may benefit those who partake of it; they do not speak of others. Then they add:

Yet we offer to you this reasonable service for those having departed in faith, forefathers, fathers, patriarchs, prophets, apostles.

“Reasonable service” [Romans 12:1], however, does not mean the offering itself, but prayers and all things that are preferred there.

[94] Regarding the adversaries’ quoting the Fathers about the offering for the dead, we know that the ancients speak of prayer for the dead, which we do not ban. We disapprove of applying the Lord’s Supper for the dead by the outward act (ex opere operato). The ancients do not favor the adversaries regarding the outward act (opus operatum). Even though they have the references especially of Gregory or the moderns, we hold up to them the most clear and certain Scriptures.

[95] There is a great diversity among the Fathers. They were men and could err and be deceived. If they were alive now and would see their sayings assigned as falsehood for the scandalous lies that the adversaries teach about the outward act (opus operatum), they would interpret themselves far differently.
