# November 4

## Psalmody

1The LORD says to my Lord: “Sit at my | right hand,* until I make your enemies your | footstool.” 2The LORD sends forth from Zion your mighty | scepter.* Rule in the midst of your | enemies! 3Your people will offer themselves freely on the day of your power, in holy | garments;* from the womb of the morning, the dew of your youth | will be yours. 4The LORD has sworn and will not | change his mind,* “You are a priest forever after the order of Mel- | chizedek.” 5The Lord is at your | right hand;* he will shatter kings on the day | of his wrath. 6He will execute judgment among the nations, filling them with | corpses;* he will shatter chiefs over the | wide earth. 7He will drink from the brook | by the way;* therefore he will lift | up his head.—Psalm 110
Additional Psalm: Psalm 108

## Old Testament Reading: Jeremiah 5:1–19

Jerusalem Refused to Repent

1Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, look and take note! Search her squares to see if you can find a man, one who does justice and seeks truth, that I may pardon her. 2Though they say, “As the LORD lives,” yet they swear falsely. 3O LORD, do not your eyes look for truth? You have struck them down, but they felt no anguish; you have consumed them, but they refused to take correction. They have made their faces harder than rock; they have refused to repent. 4Then I said, “These are only the poor; they have no sense; for they do not know the way of the LORD, the justice of their God. 5I will go to the great and will speak to them, for they know the way of the LORD, the justice of their God.” But they all alike had broken the yoke; they had burst the bonds. 6Therefore a lion from the forest shall strike them down; a wolf from the desert shall devastate them. A leopard is watching their cities; everyone who goes out of them shall be torn in pieces, because their transgressions are many, their apostasies are great. 7“How can I pardon you? Your children have forsaken me and have sworn by those who are no gods. When I fed them to the full, they committed adultery and trooped to the houses of whores. 8They were well-fed, lusty stallions, each neighing for his neighbor’s wife. 9Shall I not punish them for these things? declares the LORD; and shall I not avenge myself on a nation such as this? 10“Go up through her vine rows and destroy, but make not a full end; strip away her branches, for they are not the LORD’s. 11For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have been utterly treacherous to me, declares the LORD. 12They have spoken falsely of the LORD and have said, ‘He will do nothing; no disaster will come upon us, nor shall we see sword or famine. 13The prophets will become wind; the word is not in them. Thus shall it be done to them!’”

The LORD Proclaims Judgment

14Therefore thus says the LORD, the God of hosts: “Because you have spoken this word, behold, I am making my words in your mouth a fire, and this people wood, and the fire shall consume them. 15Behold, I am bringing against you a nation from afar, O house of Israel, declares the LORD. It is an enduring nation; it is an ancient nation, a nation whose language you do not know, nor can you understand what they say. 16Their quiver is like an open tomb; they are all mighty warriors. 17They shall eat up your harvest and your food; they shall eat up your sons and your daughters; they shall eat up your flocks and your herds; they shall eat up your vines and your fig trees; your fortified cities in which you trust they shall beat down with the sword.” 18“But even in those days, declares the LORD, I will not make a full end of you. 19And when your people say, ‘Why has the LORD our God done all these things to us?’ you shall say to them, ‘As you have forsaken me and served foreign gods in your land, so you shall serve foreigners in a land that is not yours.’”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 22:23–46

Sadducees Ask About the Resurrection

23The same day Sadducees came to [Jesus], who say that there is no resurrection, and they asked him a question, 24saying, “Teacher, Moses said, ‘If a man dies having no children, his brother must marry the widow and raise up children for his brother.’ 25Now there were seven brothers among us. The first married and died, and having no children left his wife to his brother. 26So too the second and third, down to the seventh. 27After them all, the woman died. 28In the resurrection, therefore, of the seven, whose wife will she be? For they all had her.” 29But Jesus answered them, “You are wrong, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God. 30For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. 31And as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was said to you by God: 32‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not God of the dead, but of the living.” 33And when the crowd heard it, they were astonished at his teaching.

The Great Commandment

34But when the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they gathered together. 35And one of them, a lawyer, asked him a question to test him. 36“Teacher, which is the great commandment in the Law?” 37And he said to him, “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. 38This is the great and first commandment. 39And a second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. 40On these two commandments depend all the Law and the Prophets.”

Whose Son Is the Christ?

41Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them a question, 42say-ing, “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him, “The son of David.” 43He said to them, “How is it then that David, in the Spirit, calls him Lord, saying, 44“‘The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies under your feet’? 45If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?” 46And no one was able to answer him a word, nor from that day did anyone dare to ask him any more questions.

## Writing

[Luther] taught that good works do not save a person, but only faith, without good works… He did not say that, to be saved, a person must have faith and, in addition to that, good works, or love; but he did teach that those who would be saved must have a faith that produces love spontaneously and is fruitful in good works. That does not mean that faith saves on account of love which springs from it, but that the faith which the Holy Spirit creates and which cannot but do good works justifies because it clings to the gracious promises of Christ and because it lays hold of Christ. It is active in good works because it is genuine faith. The believer need not at all be exhorted to do good works; his faith does them automatically. The believer engages in good works, not from a sense of duty, in return for the forgiveness of his sins, but chiefly because he cannot help doing them. It is altogether impossible that genuine faith should not break forth from the believer’s heart in works of love.—C. F. W. Walther

## Hymnody

I am content! My Jesus ever lives, In whom my heart is pleased. He has
fulfilled the Law of God for me, God’s wrath He has appeased. Since He in
death could perish never, I also shall not die forever. I am content! I am
content!
—I Am Content! My Jesus Ever Lives (LSB 468:1)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, You have commanded us to love You above all things and our neighbors as ourselves. Grant us the Spirit to think and do what is pleasing in Your sight, that our faith in You may never waver and our love for one another may not falter; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (A83)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXIV (XII) 41–51

[41] Now, good people, it can easily be determined that the complaint against us—that we abolish the daily sacrifice—is entirely false. Experience shows what sort of Antiochi they are who hold power in the Church. Under the appearance of religion, they assume to themselves the kingdom of the world. They rule without concern for religion and the teaching of the Gospel. They wage war like kings of the world, and they set up new services in the Church.

[42] The adversaries keep only the ceremony in the Mass and publicly apply this to sacrilegious gain. Afterward, they misrepresent that this work, as applied for others, merits grace and all good things for them.

[43] They do not teach the Gospel in their sermons, they do not comfort consciences, they do not show that sins are freely forgiven for Christ’s sake. Rather, they present the worship of saints, human satisfactions, and human traditions, and they affirm that people are justified before God by these. Although some of these traditions are clearly godless, they still defend them by violence. If any preacher wants to be regarded as more learned, he presents philosophical questions, which neither the people nor even those who propose them understand. Lastly, those who are more tolerable teach the Law and say nothing about the righteousness of faith.

[44] In the Confutation, the adversaries fuss over the desertion of churches. Altars stand unadorned, lacking candles and images. They regard these trifles as ornaments to churches.

[45] It is a far different desertion that Daniel means (11:31; 12:11), namely, ignorance of the Gospel. Overwhelmed by the multitude and variety of traditions and opinions, the people were in no way able to welcome the sum of Christian doctrine.

[46] Among the people, who ever understood the doctrine of repentance as presented by the adversaries? Yet this is the chief topic of Christian doctrine.

Consciences were tormented by the listing of offenses and by satisfactions. The adversaries never mention faith, by which we freely receive the forgiveness of sins. All the books and all the sermons of the adversaries were silent about the exercises of faith, struggling with despair, and the free forgiveness of sins for Christ’s sake.

[47] To these, the horrible profanation of the Masses and many other godless services in the churches were added. This is the desertion described by Daniel.

[48] On the contrary, by God’s favor, our priests attend to the ministry of the Word, teach the Gospel about Christ’s blessings, and show that the forgiveness of sins happens freely for Christ’s sake. This doctrine brings sure comfort to consciences. The doctrine of good works that God commands is also added. The worth and use of the Sacraments are declared.

[49] If the daily sacrifice was the proper use of the Sacrament, we would keep the sacrifice. The adversaries would not. For their priests use the Sacrament to make money. There is a more frequent and more conscientious use. The people use it after having first been instructed and examined. People are taught about the true use of the Sacrament. It was set up to be a seal and testimony of the free forgiveness of sins, and so that it should remind alarmed consciences to be truly confident and believe that their sins are freely forgiven. Since we keep both the preaching of the Gospel and the lawful use of the Sacrament, the daily sacrifice remains with us.

[50] If we must speak of outward appearances, Church attendance among us is better than among the adversaries. The audiences are held by useful and clear sermons. (Neither the people nor the teachers have ever understood the doctrine of the adversaries.) ‹There is nothing that keeps people at church more than good preaching.›

[51] The true adornment of the churches is godly, useful, and clear doctrine, the devout use of the Sacraments, fervent prayer, and the like. Candles, golden vessels, and similar adornments are fitting, but they are not the specifically unique adornment belonging to the Church. If the adversaries make these things the focus of worship, and not the preaching of the Gospel, in faith (and the struggles of faith) they are to be numbered among those whom Daniel describes as worshiping their god with gold and silver [Daniel 11:38].
