# November 13

## Psalmody

12What shall I render | to the LORD * for all his bene- | fits to me? 13I will lift up the cup of sal- | vation* and call on the name | of the LORD, 14I will pay my vows | to the LORD * in the presence of all his | people. 15Precious in the sight | of the LORD * is the death | of his saints. 16O LORD, I am your | servant;* I am your servant, the son of your maidservant. You have | loosed my bonds. 17I will offer to you the sacrifice of thanks- | giving* and call on the name | of the LORD. 18I will pay my vows | to the LORD * in the presence of all his | people, 19in the courts of the house | of the LORD,* in your midst, O Jerusalem. | Praise the LORD!—Psalm 116:12–19
Additional Psalm: Psalm 50:7–15

## Old Testament Reading: Jeremiah 26:1–19

Jeremiah Threatened with Death

1In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came from the LORD: 2“Thus says the LORD: Stand in the court of the LORD’s house, and speak to all the cities of Judah that come to worship in the house of the LORD all the words that I command you to speak to them; do not hold back a word. 3It may be they will listen, and every one turn from his evil way, that I may relent of the disaster that I intend to do to them because of their evil deeds. 4You shall say to them, ‘Thus says the LORD: If you will not listen to me, to walk in my law that I have set before you, 5and to listen to the words of my servants the prophets whom I send to you urgently, though you have not listened, 6then I will make this house like Shiloh, and I will make this city a curse for all the nations of the earth.’” 7The priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the LORD. 8And when Jeremiah had finished speaking all that the LORD had commanded him to speak to all the peo-ple, then the priests and the prophets and all the people laid hold of him, saying, “You shall die! 9Why have you prophesied in the name of the LORD, saying, ‘This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate, without inhabitant’?” And all the people gathered around Jeremiah in the house of the LORD. 10When the officials of Judah heard these things, they came up from the king’s house to the house of the LORD and took their seat in the entry of the New Gate of the house of the LORD. 11Then the priests and the prophets said to the officials and to all the people, “This man deserves the sentence of death, because he has prophesied against this city, as you have heard with your own ears.” 12Then Jeremiah spoke to all the officials and all the people, saying, “The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and this city all the words you have heard. 13Now therefore mend your ways and your deeds, and obey the voice of the LORD your God, and the LORD will relent of the disaster that he has pronounced against you. 14But as for me, behold, I am in your hands. Do with me as seems good and right to you. 15Only know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this city and its inhabitants, for in truth the LORD sent me to you to speak all these words in your ears.”

Jeremiah Spared from Death

16Then the officials and all the people said to the priests and the prophets, “This man does not deserve the sentence of death, for he has spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God.” 17And certain of the elders of the land arose and spoke to all the assembled people, saying, 18“Micah of Moresheth prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and said to all the people of Judah: ‘Thus says the Lord of hosts, “‘Zion shall be plowed as a field; Jerusalem shall become a heap of ruins, and the mountain of the house a wooded height.’ 19Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him to death? Did he not fear the LORD and entreat the favor of the LORD, and did not the LORD relent of the disaster that he had pronounced against them? But we are about to bring great disaster upon ourselves.”

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 26:20–35

[The Passover with the Disciples]

20When it was evening, [Jesus] reclined at table with the twelve. 21And as they were eating, he said, “Truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me.” 22And they were very sorrowful and began to say to him one after another, “Is it I, Lord?” 23He answered, “He who has dipped his hand in the dish with me will betray me. 24The Son of Man goes as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.” 25Judas, who would betray him, answered, “Is it I, Rabbi?” He said to him, “You have said so.”

Institution of the Lord’s Supper

26Now as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and after blessing it broke it and gave it to the disciples, and said, “Take, eat; this is my body.” 27And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, saying, “Drink of it, all of you, 28for this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. 29I tell you I will not drink again of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.”

Jesus Foretells Peter’s Denial

30And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. 31Then Jesus said to them, “You will all fall away because of me this night. For it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’ 32But after I am raised up, I will go before you to Galilee.” 33Peter answered him, “Though they all fall away because of you, I will never fall away.” 34Jesus said to him, “Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.” 35Peter said to him, “Even if I must die with you, I will not deny you!” And all the disciples said the same. Additional Reading: Revelation 13:1–18

## Writing

Our Lord gives thanks, to teach us how we ought to celebrate this Sacrament, and to show that He does not unwillingly go to the Passion, and to teach us that whatever we may suffer we are to bear it thankfully, thence also suggesting good hopes. For if the type was a deliverance from such bondage, how much more will the truth set the world free and He will be delivered up for the benefit of our race. Wherefore, I would add, neither did He appoint the Sacrament before this, but only at the point at which the rites of the Law were to cease. Thus the very chief of the feasts, the Passover, He brings to an end. He removes the feasts to another most awful table, and He says, “Take, eat. This is My body, which is broken for many.” And how were they not confounded at hearing this? Because He had before told unto them many and great things regarding this. Although they needed no more explanation because they had heard enough about it, but He does speak of the cause of His Passion, namely, the taking away of sins. And He calls it blood of a new testament, that of the undertaking, the promise, the new law. For this He is also what He did in the old covenant, and this comprises the testament that is the new law. As the old testament had sheep and bulls, so this has the Lord’s blood. Hence He also shows that He is soon to die, for which reason He also made mention of a testament, and reminds them in it of the former Testament, which was also dedicated with blood. And again He tells the cause of His death, that is, that His blood “is shed for many for the remission of sins”; and He says, “Do this in remembrance of Me.” Do you see how He removes and draws them off from Jewish customs? For as you did that, He says, in remembrance of the miracles in Egypt, so do this likewise in remembrance of Me. The blood of lambs was shed for the preservation of the firstborn, this is shed for the remission of the sins of the whole world.—John Chrysostom

## Hymnody

Praise the Father, who from heaven To His own this food has given, Who,
to mend what we have done, Gave into death His only Son.—Jesus Christ,
Our Blessed Savior (LSB 627:4)

## Prayer of the Day

O Lord, in this wondrous Sacrament You have left us a remembrance of Your passion. Grant that we may so receive the sacred mystery of Your body and blood that the fruits of Your redemption may continually be manifest in us; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L32)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXVII (XIII) 11–17

[11] First, it is very clear that a vow is illegitimate if the person who makes the vow thinks that the forgiveness of sins before God is merited by it or satisfaction is made before God for sins. This opinion clearly insults the Gospel, which teaches that the forgiveness of sins is freely granted to us for Christ’s sake, as has been said at some length before. Therefore, we have quoted correctly Paul’s declaration to the Galatians, “You are severed from Christ, you who would be justified by the law; you have fallen away from grace” (5:4). Those who seek the forgiveness of sins, not through faith in Christ, but through monastic works, divert people from Christ’s honor and crucify Christ again. Listen, listen how the writers of the Confutation look for a way out!

[12] They explain this passage of Paul only in relation to Moses’ Law, and they add that the monks obey all things for Christ’s sake. They try hard to live nearer to the Gospel in order to merit eternal life. They add a horrible conclusion in these words, “Therefore, those things are wicked that are here alleged against monasticism.”

[13] O Christ, how long will You bear these accusations with which our enemies present Your Gospel? In the Confession we said that the forgiveness of sins is received freely for Christ’s sake, through faith. O Christ, who is in the bosom of the Father, You revealed the Gospel to the world. If our teaching is not the very voice of the Gospel, if it is not the eternal Father’s judgment, we are rightly blamed. But Your death is a witness, Your resurrection is a witness, the Holy Spirit is a witness, Your entire Church is a witness of this: the true meaning of the Gospel is that we receive forgiveness of sins, not because of our merits, but because of You, through faith.

[14] When Paul denies that by Moses’ Law people merit the forgiveness of sins, he withdraws this praise much more from human traditions. He clearly presents this in Colossians 2:16. If Moses’ Law, which was divinely revealed, did not merit the forgiveness of sins, how much less do these silly observances, hostile to the civil custom of life, merit the forgiveness of sins!

[15] The adversaries wrongly claim that Paul abolishes Moses’ Law and that Christ follows in such a way that He does not freely grant the forgiveness of sins, but forgives because of the works of other laws, if any are now created.

[16] By this godless and fanatical imagination they bury Christ’s benefit. Then they wrongly claim that among those who obey this “Law of Christ,” the monks obey it better than others, because of their hypocritical poverty, obedience, and chastity, since indeed all these things are full of sham. They brag about poverty most of all. No class of men has greater license than the monks; they boast of obedience. We do not like to speak about celibacy. Gerson indicates how pure this is in most of those who desire to be sexually pure. How many of them do desire to be chaste?

[17] Of course, in this sham life the monks live more closely according to the Gospel! Christ does not follow Moses in such a way as to forgive sins because of our works, but to set His own merits and His own atoning sacrifice against God’s wrath for us, so that we may be freely forgiven. Now, apart from Christ’s atoning sacrifice, whoever applies his own merits to God’s wrath and tries to receive the forgiveness of sins because of his own merits (whether the works of Moses’ Law or of the Ten Commandments or of the rule of Benedict or of the rule of Augustine or of other rules) does away with Christ’s promise, has cast away Christ, and has fallen from grace. This is Paul’s verdict [Galatians 5:4].
