# November 26

## Psalmody

1We give thanks to you, O God; we give thanks, for your | name is near.* We recount your | wondrous deeds. 2“At the set time that | I appoint* I will judge with | equity. 3When the earth totters, and all its in- | habitants,* it is I who keep steady its | pillars. 4I say to the boastful, | ‘Do not boast,’* and to the wicked, ‘Do not lift | up your horn; 5do not lift up your | horn on high,* or speak with | haughty neck.’” 6For not from the east or | from the west* and not from the wilderness comes | lifting up, 7but it is God who executes | judgment,* putting down one and lifting up an- | other. 8For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup with foaming wine, well mixed, and he pours | out from it,* and all the wicked of the earth shall drain it down | to the dregs. 9But I will declare it for- | ever;* I will sing praises to the God of | Jacob. 10All the horns of the wicked I will | cut off,* but the horns of the righteous shall be | lifted up.—Psalm 75
Additional Psalm: Psalm 108

## Old Testament Reading: Daniel 6:1–28

Daniel and the Lions’ Den

1It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom 120 satraps, to be throughout the whole kingdom; 2and over them three presidents, of whom Daniel was one, to whom these satraps should give account, so that the king might suffer no loss. 3Then this Daniel became distinguished above all the other presidents and satraps, because an excellent spirit was in him. And the king planned to set him over the whole kingdom. 4Then the presidents and the satraps sought to find a ground for complaint against Daniel with regard to the kingdom, but they could find no ground for complaint or any fault, because he was faithful, and no error or fault was found in him. 5Then these men said, “We shall not find any ground for complaint against this Daniel unless we find it in connection with the law of his God.” 6Then these presidents and satraps came by agreement to the king and said to him, “O King Darius, live forever! 7All the presidents of the kingdom, the prefects and the satraps, the counselors and the governors are agreed that the king should establish an ordinance and enforce an injunction, that whoever makes petition to any god or man for thirty days, except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions. 8Now, O king, establish the injunction and sign the document, so that it cannot be changed, according to the law of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be revoked.” 9Therefore King Darius signed the document and injunction. 10When Daniel knew that the document had been signed, he went to his house where he had windows in his upper chamber open toward Jerusalem. He got down on his knees three times a day and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he had done previously. 11Then these men came by agreement and found Daniel making petition and plea before his God. 12Then they came near and said before the king, concerning the injunction, “O king! Did you not sign an injunction, that anyone who makes petition to any god or man within thirty days except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions?” The king answered and said, “The thing stands fast, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be revoked.” 13Then they answered and said before the king, “Daniel, who is one of the exiles from Judah, pays no attention to you, O king, or the injunction you have signed, but makes his petition three times a day.” 14Then the king, when he heard these words, was much distressed and set his mind to deliver Daniel. And he labored till the sun went down to rescue him. 15Then these men came by agreement to the king and said to the king, “Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians that no injunction or ordinance that the king establishes can be changed.” 16Then the king commanded, and Daniel was brought and cast into the den of lions. The king declared to Daniel, “May your God, whom you serve continually, deliver you!” 17And a stone was brought and laid on the mouth of the den, and the king sealed it with his own signet and with the signet of his lords, that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel. 18Then the king went to his palace and spent the night fasting; no diversions were brought to him, and sleep fled from him. 19Then, at break of day, the king arose and went in haste to the den of lions. 20As he came near to the den where Daniel was, he cried out in a tone of anguish. The king declared to Daniel, “O Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God, whom you serve continually, been able to deliver you from the lions?” 21Then Daniel said to the king, “O king, live forever! 22My God sent his angel and shut the lions’ mouths, and they have not harmed me, because I was found blameless before him; and also before you, O king, I have done no harm.” 23Then the king was exceedingly glad, and commanded that Daniel be taken up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no kind of harm was found on him, because he had trusted in his God. 24And the king commanded, and those men who had maliciously accused Daniel were brought and cast into the den of lions—they, their children, and their wives. And before they reached the bottom of the den, the lions overpowered them and broke all their bones in pieces. 25Then King Darius wrote to all the peoples, nations, and languages that dwell in all the earth: “Peace be multiplied to you. 26I make a decree, that in all my royal dominion people are to tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God, enduring forever; his kingdom shall never be destroyed, and his dominion shall be to the end. 27He delivers and rescues; he works signs and wonders in heaven and on earth, he who has saved Daniel from the power of the lions.” 28So this Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian. Additional Reading: Daniel 9:1–27

## New Testament Reading: Revelation 22:1–21

The River of Life

1Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, bright as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb 2through the middle of the street of the city; also, on either side of the river, the tree of life with its twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. 3No longer will there be anything accursed, but the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his servants will worship him. 4They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. 5And night will be no more. They will need no light of lamp or sun, for the Lord God will be their light, and they will reign forever and ever.

Jesus Is Coming

6And he said to me, “These words are trustworthy and true. And the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his servants what must soon take place.” 7“And behold, I am coming soon. Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.” 8I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. And when I heard and saw them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed them to me, 9but he said to me, “You must not do that! I am a fellow servant with you and your brothers the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God.” 10And he said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near. 11Let the evildoer still do evil, and the filthy still be filthy, and the righteous still do right, and the holy still be holy.” 12“Behold, I am coming soon, bringing my recompense with me, to repay everyone for what he has done. 13I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.” 14Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and that they may enter the city by the gates. 15Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood. 16“I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star.” 17The Spirit and the Bride say, “Come.” And let the one who hears say, “Come.” And let the one who is thirsty come; let the one who desires take the water of life without price. 18I warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues described in this book, 19and if anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book. 20He who testifies to these things says, “Surely I am coming soon.” Amen. Come, Lord Jesus! 21The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all. Amen.

## Writing

This article, “I believe in the holy Christian Church,” is as much an article of faith as the rest. This is why natural reason cannot recognize it, even if it puts on all its glasses. The devil can cover it over with offenses and divisions, so that you have to take offense at it. God too can conceal it behind faults and shortcomings of all kinds, so that you necessarily become a fool and pass false judgment on it. Christendom will not be known by sight, but by faith. And faith has to do with things not seen, Hebrews 11[:1]. Christendom joins with her Lord in the song, “Blessed is he who takes no offense at me” [Matt. 11:6]. A Christian is even hidden from himself; he does not see his holiness and virtue, but sees in himself nothing but unholiness and vice. And you, stupid know-it-all, would behold Christendom with your blind reason and unclean eyes! In a word, our holiness is in heaven, where Christ is; and not in the world, before men’s eyes, like goods in the market place. Therefore let there be offenses, divisions, heresies, and faults; let them do what they can! If only the word of the gospel remains pure among us, and we love and cherish it, we shall not doubt that Christ is with us, even when things are at their worst. As we see here in this book, that through and beyond all plagues, beasts, and evil angels Christ is nonetheless with his saints, and wins the final victory.—Martin Luther

## Hymnody

Now from that tree of Jesus’ shame Flows life eternal in His name; For all
who trust and will believe, Salvation’s living fruit receive. And of this fruit
so pure and sweet The Lord invites the world to eat, To find within this
cross of wood The tree of life with ev’ry good.—The Tree of Life (LSB
561:4)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus Christ, Alpha and Omega, bright Morning Star, You are the tree of life standing on each side of the river of the water of life, bringing healing to the nations. Prepare us for Your coming through the healing medicine of Your Word and Sacraments, putting to flight the diseases of our souls, that with willing hearts we may ever love and serve You; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1116)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Apology of the Augsburg Confession XXVIII (XIV) 20–27

[20] The adversaries also quote Hebrews 13:17, “Obey your leaders.” This passage requires obedience to the Gospel. It does not establish a dominion for the bishops apart from the Gospel. Neither should the bishops enact traditions contrary to the Gospel or interpret their traditions contrary to the Gospel. When they do this, obedience is prohibited, according to Galatians 1:9, “If anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, let him be accursed.”

[21] We make the same reply to Matthew 23:3, “So practice and observe whatever they tell you,” because clearly a universal command is not given that we should receive all things, since elsewhere Scripture asks us to “obey God rather than men” (Acts 5:29). Therefore, they teach wicked things; they should not be heard. These are wicked things: human traditions are services of God, they are necessary services, and they merit the forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

[22] The adversaries object, arguing that public offenses and turmoil have arisen under the appearance of our doctrine.

[23] We briefly reply to these. If all the scandals were combined, still the one article about the forgiveness of sins—that for Christ’s sake through faith we freely receive the forgiveness of sins—brings so much good it hides all evils.

[24] In the beginning, this gained for Luther not only our approval, but also that of many who are now fighting against us. “Former favor ceases, and mortals are forgetful,” says Pindar. Yet, we neither desire to desert truth necessary for the Church, nor can we agree with the adversaries in condemning it.

[25] For “we must obey God rather than men” [Acts 5:29]. Those who earlier condemned clear truth, and are now persecuting it with the greatest cruelty, will give an account for the schism that has arisen [Matthew 12:36]. Are there no scandals among the adversaries?

[26] How much evil is there in the sacrilegious profanation of the Mass performed for profit! What a disgrace is celibacy! But let us leave out comparisons. For now, this is our response to the Confutation.

[27] Now we leave it to the discernment of all the godly whether the adversaries are right in bragging that they have actually, from the Scriptures, refuted our Confession.
