# December 9

## Psalmody

6 I call upon you, for you will answer me, | O God;* incline your ear to me; | hear my words.
7 Wondrously show your | steadfast love,* O Savior of those who seek refuge from their adversaries at | your right hand.
8 Keep me as the apple | of your eye;* hide me in the shadow | of your wings,
9 from the wicked who do me | violence,* my deadly enemies who sur- | round me.
10 They close their hearts to | pity;* with their mouths they speak ar- | rogantly.
11 They have now surrounded | our steps;* they set their eyes to cast us | to the ground.
12 He is like a lion ea- | ger to tear,* as a young lion lurking in | ambush.
13 Arise, | O LORD!* Confront him, sub- | due him! Deliver my soul from the wicked by your sword, 14 from men by your hand, | O LORD,* from men of the world whose portion is | in this life. You fill their womb with | treasure;* they are satisfied with children, and they leave their abundance to their | infants.
15 As for me, I shall behold your face in | righteousness;* when I awake, I shall be satisfied with your | likeness.
—Psalm 17:6–15
Additional Psalm: Psalm 148

## Old Testament Reading: Isaiah 26:1–19

You Keep Him in Perfect Peace

1In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah: “We have a strong city; he sets up salvation as walls and bulwarks. 2Open the gates, that the righteous nation that keeps faith may enter in. 3You keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on you, because he trusts in you. 4Trust in the LORD forever, for the Lord GOD is an everlasting rock. 5For he has humbled the inhabitants of the height, the lofty city. He lays it low, lays it low to the ground, casts it to the dust. 6The foot tramples it, the feet of the poor, the steps of the needy.” 7The path of the righteous is level; you make level the way of the righteous. 8In the path of your judgments, O LORD, we wait for you; your name and remembrance are the desire of our soul. 9My soul yearns for you in the night; my spirit within me earnestly seeks you. For when your judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness. 10If favor is shown to the wicked, he does not learn righteousness; in the land of uprightness he deals corruptly and does not see the majesty of the LORD. 11O LORD, your hand is lifted up, but they do not see it. Let them see your zeal for your people, and be ashamed. Let the fire for your adversaries consume them. 12O LORD, you will ordain peace for us, for you have indeed done for us all our works. 13O LORD our God, other lords besides you have ruled over us, but your name alone we bring to remembrance. 14They are dead, they will not live; they are shades, they will not arise; to that end you have visited them with destruction and wiped out all remembrance of them. 15But you have increased the nation, O LORD, you have increased the nation; you are glorified; you have enlarged all the borders of the land. 16O LORD, in distress they sought you; they poured out a whispered prayer when your discipline was upon them. 17Like a pregnant woman who writhes and cries out in her pangs when she is near to giving birth, so were we because of you, O LORD; 18we were pregnant, we writhed, but we have given birth to wind. We have accomplished no deliverance in the earth, and the inhabitants of the world have not fallen. 19Your dead shall live; their bodies shall rise. You who dwell in the dust, awake and sing for joy! For your dew is a dew of light, and the earth will give birth to the dead.”

## New Testament Reading: 1 John 3:1–24

[Children of God]

1See what kind of love the Father has given to us, that we should be called children of God; and so we are. The reason why the world does not know us is that it did not know him. 2Beloved, we are God’s children now, and what we will be has not yet appeared; but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is. 3And everyone who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure. 4Everyone who makes a practice of sinning also practices lawlessness; sin is lawlessness. 5You know that he appeared to take away sins, and in him there is no sin. 6No one who abides in him keeps on sinning; no one who keeps on sinning has either seen him or known him. 7Little children, let no one deceive you. Whoever practices righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous. 8Whoever makes a practice of sinning is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil. 9No one born of God makes a practice of sinning, for God’s seed abides in him, and he cannot keep on sinning because he has been born of God. 10By this it is evident who are the children of God, and who are the children of the devil: whoever does not practice righteousness is not of God, nor is the one who does not love his brother.

Love One Another

11For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. 12We should not be like Cain, who was of the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his own deeds were evil and his brother’s righteous. 13Do not be surprised, brothers, that the world hates you. 14We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. Whoever does not love abides in death. 15Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. 16By this we know love, that he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers. 17But if anyone has the world’s goods and sees his brother in need, yet closes his heart against him, how does God’s love abide in him? 18Little children, let us not love in word or talk but in deed and in truth. 19By this we shall know that we are of the truth and reassure our heart before him; 20for whenever our heart condemns us, God is greater than our heart, and he knows everything. 21Beloved, if our heart does not condemn us, we have confidence before God; 22and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do what pleases him. 23And this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he has commanded us. 24Whoever keeps his commandments abides in God, and God in him. And by this we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit whom he has given us.

## Writing

If anyone should carefully meditate on [the patriarchs] one by one, he will realize the greatness of the gifts given by each one. For from [Jacob] came the priest and Levites and all who serve at the altar of God; from him came the Lord Jesus according to the flesh; from him came the kings and rulers and leaders of Judah; and his remaining tribes have no little glory, since God promised that “your seed shall be as the stars of the sky.” All these, then, were glorified and magnified not through themselves or their works or the good deeds they had brought to completion, but through His will. Thus we also, called through His will in Christ Jesus, are justified not through ourselves nor through our own wisdom or understanding or godliness or works that we have brought to completion in piety of heart, but through faith, through which almighty God has justified all men from eternity; to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen. What then shall we do, brothers? Shall we lie about and quit doing good and forsake love? May the Master never allow this to be so—at any rate not among us! Rather, let us hasten with eagerness and strong desire to bring every good work to perfection. We have seen that the righteous were adorned with good works; and the Lord Himself, having adorned Himself with good works, rejoiced. Therefore, since we have this pattern, let us go forward in His will without stint; let us work the work of righteousness with all our strength.
—Clement of Rome

## Hymnody

Yet, though conscience’ voice appall me,
   Father, I will seek Your face;
Though Your child I dare not call me,
   Yet receive me in Your grace.
Do not for my sins forsake me;
Let Your wrath not overtake me.
—Lord, to You I Make Confession (LSB 608:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord, we implore You, grant Your people grace to withstand the temptations of the devil and with pure hearts and minds to follow You, the only God; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (H77)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Large Catechism I 69–77

[69] Therefore, I advise and exhort as before that with warning and threatening, restraint and punishment, the children should be trained early to shun falsehood. They should especially avoid the use of God’s name to support falsehood. For where children are allowed to do as they please, no good will result. This is clear even now. The world is worse than it has ever been, and there is no government, no obedience, no loyalty, no faith, but only daring, unbridled people. No teaching or reproof helps them. All this is God’s wrath and punishment for such lewd contempt of this commandment.

[70] On the other hand, children should be constantly urged and moved to honor God’s name and to have it always upon their lips for everything that may happen to them or come to their notice [Psalm 8:2; 34:1; Matthew 21:16; Hebrews 13:15]. For that is the true honor of His name, to look to it and call upon it for all consolation [Psalm 66:2; 105:1]. Then—as we have heard in the First Commandment—the heart by faith gives God the honor due Him first. Afterward, the lips give Him honor by confession.

[71] This is also a blessed and useful habit and very effective against the devil. He is ever around us and lies in wait to bring us into sin and shame, disaster and trouble [2 Timothy 2:26]. But he hates to hear God’s name and cannot remain long where it is spoken and called upon from the heart.

[72] Indeed, many terrible and shocking disasters would fall upon us if God did not preserve us by our calling upon His name. I have tried it myself. I learned by experience that often sudden great suffering was immediately averted and removed by calling on God. To confuse the devil, I say, we should always have this holy name in our mouth, so that the devil may not be able to injure us as he wishes.

[73] It is also useful that we form the habit of daily commending ourselves to God [Psalm 31:5], with soul and body, wife, children, servants, and all that we have, against every need that may arise. So also the blessing and thanksgiving at meals [Mark 8:6] and other prayers, morning and evening, have begun and remained in use [Exodus 29:38–43].

[74] Likewise, children should continue to cross themselves when anything monstrous or terrible is seen or heard. They can shout, “Lord God, protect us!” “Help, dear Lord Jesus!” and such. Also, if anyone meets with unexpected good fortune, however trivial, he says, “God be praised and thanked!” or “God has bestowed this on me!” and so on, just as the children used to learn to fast and pray to St. Nicholas and other saints before. This would be more pleasing and acceptable to God than all monasticism and Carthusian acts of holiness.

[75] Look, we could train our youth this way [Proverbs 22:6], in a childlike way and playfully in the fear and honor of God. Then the First and Second Commandments might be well kept and in constant practice. Then some good might take root, spring up, and bear fruit. People would grow up whom an entire land might relish and enjoy.

[76] In addition, this would be the true way to bring up children well as long as they could be trained with kindness and delight. For children who must be forced with rods and blows will not develop into a good generation. At best they will remain godly under such treatment only as long as the rod is upon their backs [Proverbs 10:13].

[77] But ‹teaching the commandments in a childlike and playful way› spreads its roots in the heart so that children fear God more than rods and clubs. This I say with such simplicity for the sake of the young, that it may penetrate their minds. For we are preaching to children, so we must also talk like them. In this way we would prevent the abuse of the divine name and teach the right use. This should happen not only in words, but also in practice and life. Then we may know God is well pleased with this and will as richly reward good use of His name as He will terribly punish the abuse.

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT
