# December 18

## Psalmody

81 My soul longs for your sal- | vation;* I hope | in your word.
82 My eyes long for your | promise;* I ask, “When will you | comfort me?”
83 For I have become like a wineskin | in the smoke,* yet I have not forgotten your | statutes.
84 How long must your ser- | vant endure?* When will you judge those who perse- | cute me?
85 The insolent have dug pit- | falls for me;* they do not live according | to your law.
86 All your command- | ments are sure;* they persecute me with falsehood; | help me!
87 They have almost made an end of me | on earth,* but I have not forsaken your | precepts.
88 In your steadfast love | give me life,* that I may keep the testimonies | of your mouth.
—Psalm 119:81–88
Additional Psalm: Psalm 145

## Old Testament Reading: Isaiah 34:1–2, 8–35:10

Judgment on the Nations

1Draw near, O nations, to hear, and give attention, O peoples! Let the earth hear, and all that fills it; the world, and all that comes from it. 2For the LORD is enraged against all the nations, and furious against all their host; he has devoted them to destruction, has given them over for slaughter.… 8For the LORD has a day of vengeance, a year of recompense for the cause of Zion. 9And the streams of Edom shall be turned into pitch, and her soil into sulfur; her land shall become burning pitch. 10Night and day it shall not be quenched; its smoke shall go up forever. From generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it forever and ever. 11But the hawk and the porcupine shall possess it, the owl and the raven shall dwell in it. He shall stretch the line of confusion over it, and the plumb line of emptiness. 12Its nobles—there is no one there to call it a kingdom, and all its princes shall be nothing. 13Thorns shall grow over its strongholds, nettles and thistles in its fortresses. It shall be the haunt of jackals, an abode for ostriches. 14And wild animals shall meet with hyenas; the wild goat shall cry to his fellow; indeed, there the night bird settles and finds for herself a resting place. 15There the owl nests and lays and hatches and gathers her young in her shadow; indeed, there the hawks are gathered, each one with her mate. 16Seek and read from the book of the LORD: Not one of these shall be missing; none shall be without her mate. For the mouth of the LORD has commanded, and his Spirit has gathered them. 17He has cast the lot for them; his hand has portioned it out to them with the line; they shall possess it forever; from generation to generation they shall dwell in it.

The Ransomed Shall Return

35:1The wilderness and the dry land shall be glad; the desert shall rejoice and blossom like the crocus; 2it shall blossom abundantly and rejoice with joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it, the majesty of Carmel and Sharon. They shall see the glory of the LORD, the majesty of our God. 3Strengthen the weak hands, and make firm the feeble knees. 4Say to those who have an anxious heart, “Be strong; fear not! Behold, your God will come with vengeance, with the recompense of God. He will come and save you.” 5Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf unstopped; 6then shall the lame man leap like a deer, and the tongue of the mute sing for joy. For waters break forth in the wilderness, and streams in the desert; 7the burning sand shall become a pool, and the thirsty ground springs of water; in the haunt of jackals, where they lie down, the grass shall become reeds and rushes. 8And a highway shall be there, and it shall be called the Way of Holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it. It shall belong to those who walk on the way; even if they are fools, they shall not go astray. 9No lion shall be there, nor shall any ravenous beast come up on it; they shall not be found there, but the redeemed shall walk there. 10And the ransomed of the LORD shall return and come to Zion with singing; everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Additional Reading: Micah 1:1–7:20

## New Testament Reading: Revelation 6:1–17

The Seven Seals

1Now I watched when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunder, “Come!” 2And I looked, and behold, a white horse! And its rider had a bow, and a crown was given to him, and he came out conquering, and to conquer. 3When he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say, “Come!” 4And out came another horse, bright red. Its rider was permitted to take peace from the earth, so that people should slay one another, and he was given a great sword. 5When he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say, “Come!” And I looked, and behold, a black horse! And its rider had a pair of scales in his hand. 6And I heard what seemed to be a voice in the midst of the four living creatures, saying, “A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius, and do not harm the oil and wine!” 7When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “Come!” 8And I looked, and behold, a pale horse! And its rider’s name was Death, and Hades followed him. And they were given authority over a fourth of the earth, to kill with sword and with famine and with pestilence and by wild beasts of the earth. 9When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain for the word of God and for the witness they had borne. 10They cried out with a loud voice, “O Sovereign Lord, holy and true, how long before you will judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?” 11Then they were each given a white robe and told to rest a little longer, until the number of their fellow servants and their brothers should be complete, who were to be killed as they themselves had been. 12When he opened the sixth seal, I looked, and behold, there was a great earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth, the full moon became like blood, 13and the stars of the sky fell to the earth as the fig tree sheds its winter fruit when shaken by a gale. 14The sky vanished like a scroll that is being rolled up, and every mountain and island was removed from its place. 15Then the kings of the earth and the great ones and the generals and the rich and the powerful, and everyone, slave and free, hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains, 16calling to the mountains and rocks, “Fall on us and hide us from the face of him who is seated on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, 17for the great day of their wrath has come, and who can stand?”

## Writing

Our one Lord Jesus Christ, true God and true man … was lifted up, [and] at the right hand of God He sits in that flesh which He assumed for us, and He will come in glory to judge the living and the dead, whose kingdom shall have no end.… When that has been accomplished, all the elect of all nations, tribes, peoples, and tongues shall be standing before the throne in the presence of the Lamb, clothed with white garments and with palms in their hands. They shall cry with a loud voice, “Salvation to our God who sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb.” Of them it is said, “These are they who have come out of the great tribulation; and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve Him day and night within His temple; and He who sits upon the throne dwells above them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; the sun shall not fall upon them, nor any scorching heat; for the Lamb, who is in the midst of throne, will direct them, and He will guide them to springs of living waters; and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes. And everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.”
—Agobard of Lyons

## Hymnody

Behold a host, arrayed in white,
Like thousand snow-clad mountains bright!
   With palms they stand;
   Who is this band
Before the throne of light?
These are the saints of glorious fame,
Who from the great affliction came
   And in the flood
   Of Jesus’ blood
Are cleansed from guilt and shame.
They now serve God both day and night;
They sing their songs in endless light.
   Their anthems ring
   As they all sing
With angels shining bright.
—Behold a Host, Arrayed in White (LSB 676:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful and everlasting God, You did not spare Your only Son but delivered Him up for us all to bear our sins on the cross. Grant that our hearts may be so fixed with steadfast faith in Him that we fear not the power of sin, death, and the devil; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L31) The Great “O” Antiphon O Adonai and ruler of the house of Israel, who appeared to Moses in the burning bush and gave him the Law on | Sinai:* Come with an outstretched arm and re- | deem us.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Large Catechism I 150–157
