# December 25

## Psalmody

1 Oh sing to the LORD a | new song;* sing to the LORD, | all the earth!
2 Sing to the LORD, | bless his name;* tell of his salvation from | day to day.
3 Declare his glory among the | nations,* his marvelous works among all the | peoples!
4 For great is the LORD, and greatly | to be praised;* he is to be feared a- | bove all gods.
5 For all the gods of the peoples are worthless | idols,* but the LORD made the | heavens.
11 Let the heavens be glad, and let the | earth rejoice;* let the sea roar, and all that fills it; 12 let the field exult, and every- | thing in it! Then shall all the trees of the forest sing for joy 13 before the LORD, | for he comes,* for he comes to | judge the earth. He will judge the world in | righteousness,* and the peoples in his | faithfulness.
—Psalm 96:1–5, 11–13
Additional Psalm: Psalm 150

## Old Testament Reading: Isaiah 49:1–18

The Servant of the LORD

1Listen to me, O coastlands, and give attention, you peoples from afar. The LORD called me from the womb, from the body of my mother he named my name. 2He made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand he hid me; he made me a polished arrow; in his quiver he hid me away. 3And he said to me, “You are my servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified.” 4But I said, “I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for nothing and vanity; yet surely my right is with the LORD, and my recompense with my God.” 5And now the LORD says, he who formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob back to him; and that Israel might be gathered to him—for I am honored in the eyes of the LORD, and my God has become my strength—6he says: “It is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to bring back the preserved of Israel; I will make you as a light for the nations, that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth.” 7Thus says the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel and his Holy One, to one deeply despised, abhorred by the nation, the servant of rulers: “Kings shall see and arise; princes, and they shall prostrate themselves; because of the LORD, who is faithful, the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you.”

The Restoration of Israel

8Thus says the LORD: “In a time of favor I have answered you; in a day of salvation I have helped you; I will keep you and give you as a covenant to the people, to establish the land, to apportion the desolate heritages, 9saying to the prisoners, ‘Come out,’ to those who are in darkness, ‘Appear.’ They shall feed along the ways; on all bare heights shall be their pasture; 10they shall not hunger or thirst, neither scorching wind nor sun shall strike them, for he who has pity on them will lead them, and by springs of water will guide them. 11And I will make all my mountains a road, and my highways shall be raised up. 12Behold, these shall come from afar, and behold, these from the north and from the west, and these from the land of Syene.” 13Sing for joy, O heavens, and exult, O earth; break forth, O mountains, into singing! For the LORD has comforted his people and will have compassion on his afflicted. 14But Zion said, “The LORDhas forsaken me; my Lord has forgotten me.” 15“Can a woman forget her nursing child, that she should have no compassion on the son of her womb? Even these may forget, yet I will not forget you. 16Behold, I have engraved you on the palms of my hands; your walls are continually before me. 17Your builders make haste; your destroyers and those who laid you waste go out from you. 18Lift up your eyes around and see; they all gather, they come to you. As I live, declares the LORD, you shall put them all on as an ornament; you shall bind them on as a bride does.

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 1:1–17

The Genealogy of Jesus Christ

1The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. 2Abraham was the father of Isaac, and Isaac the father of Jacob, and Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers, 3and Judah the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar, and Perez the father of Hezron, and Hezron the father of Ram, 4and Ram the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab the father of Nahshon, and Nahshon the father of Salmon, 5and Salmon the father of Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz the father of Obed by Ruth, and Obed the father of Jesse, 6and Jesse the father of David the king. And David was the father of Solomon by the wife of Uriah, 7and Solomon the father of Rehoboam, and Rehoboam the father of Abijah, and Abijah the father of Asaph, 8and Asaph the father of Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat the father of Joram, and Joram the father of Uzziah, 9and Uzziah the father of Jotham, and Jotham the father of Ahaz, and Ahaz the father of Hezekiah, 10and Hezekiah the father of Manasseh, and Manasseh the father of Amos, and Amos the father of Josiah, 11and Josiah the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the deportation to Babylon. 12And after the deportation to Babylon: Jechoniah was the father of Shealtiel, and Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel, 13and Zerubbabel the father of Abiud, and Abiud the father of Eliakim, and Eliakim the father of Azor, 14and Azor the father of Zadok, and Zadok the father of Achim, and Achim the father of Eliud, 15and Eliud the father of Eleazar, and Eleazar the father of Matthan, and Matthan the father of Jacob, 16and Jacob the father of Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom Jesus was born, who is called Christ. 17So all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen generations, and from David to the deportation to Babylon fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babylon to the Christ fourteen generations.

## Writing

Man was ensnared by the assault of the archfiend and broke his Creator’s command, and was stripped of grace and put off his confidence with God, and covered himself with the harshness of a toilsome life (for this is the meaning of the fig leaves). He was clothed about with death, that is, mortality and the grossness of flesh (for this is what the garment of skins signifies) and was banished from Paradise by God’s just judgment, and condemned to death, and made subject to corruption. Yet in His pity, God, who gave man his being and who in His graciousness bestowed on him a life of happiness, did not disregard man.… For it was sin that brought death like a wild and savage beast into the world to the ruin of the human life. [But the Redeemer was] without sin and not made liable through sin to death.… For the very Creator and Lord Himself undertakes a struggle on behalf of the work of His own hands.… And since the enemy snares man by the hope of Godhead, he himself is snared in turn by the screen of flesh, and thus the goodness and wisdom, the justice and might of God are revealed. God’s goodness is revealed in that He did not disregard the frailty of His own handiwork. He was moved with compassion for him in his fall and stretched forth His hand to him so that in the exercise of His justice, when man was overcome, the tyrant would not have another victory. God did not snatch man by might from death, but in His goodness and justice He made him, who had become the slave of death through his sins, once more a conqueror. God rescued man, like by like—most difficult though it seemed—and His wisdom is seen in His devising the most fitting solution of the difficulty. For by the good pleasure of our God and Father, the only- begotten Son and Word of God and God … bent the heavens and descended to earth.… What greater thing is there, than that God should become man? And the Word became flesh without being changed, of the Holy Spirit, and Mary the holy and ever-virgin one, the mother of God. And He acts as mediator between God and man, He, the only lover of man, conceived in the Virgin’s chaste womb without will or desire or any connection with man or pleasurable generation, but through the Holy Spirit and the first offspring of Adam. And He, who is like us, becomes obedient to the Father and finds a remedy for our disobedience in what He had assumed from us, and became a pattern of obedience to us without which it is not possible to obtain salvation.
—John of Damascus

## Hymnody

What Adam lost, none could reclaim,
   And Paradise was barred
Until the second Adam came
   To mend what sin had marred.
For when the time was full and right
   God sent His only Son;
He came to us as life and light
   And our redemption won.
—O Sing of Christ (LSB 362:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Most merciful God, You gave Your eternal Word to become incarnate of the pure Virgin. Grant Your people grace to put away fleshly lusts, that they may be ready for Your visitation; through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L07) The Nativity of Our Lord—Christmas Day Advent prepared us for the coming of the Savior, the fulfillment of the promise first made in the Garden of Eden in response to the sin of Adam and Eve. Christmas is the day we celebrate that hope fulfilled. Jesus is the only hope of the world, because Jesus is the only one who could set us free from our sins. The commemoration of the Nativity of Our Lord puts before us once again the story of the long-awaited King who left His heavenly throne to enter time and become human like one of us. When God wanted to save you from your sins, He did not send a prophet or even an angel: He sent His own Son into human flesh just like ours.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Large Catechism I 222–233
