# December 27

## Psalmody

1 Give the king your justice, | O God,* and your righteousness to the | royal son!
4 May he defend the cause of the poor of the people, give deliverance to the children of the | needy,* and crush the op- | pressor!
10 May the kings of Tarshish and of the coastlands render him | tribute;* may the kings of Sheba and Seba | bring gifts!
11 May all kings fall down be- | fore him,* all nations | serve him!
12 For he delivers the needy | when he calls,* the poor and him who has no | helper.
13 He has pity on the weak and the | needy,* and saves the lives of the | needy.
14 From oppression and violence he re- | deems their life,* and precious is their blood | in his sight.
15 Long may he live; may gold of Sheba be giv- | en to him!* May prayer be made for him continually, and blessings invoked for him | all the day!
18 Blessèd be the LORD, the God of | Israel,* who alone does | wondrous things.
19 Blessèd be his glorious name for- | ever;* may the whole earth be filled with his glory! Amen and | Amen!
—Psalm 72:1, 4, 10–15, 18–19
Additional Psalm: Psalm 92

## Old Testament Reading: Isaiah 51:17–52:12

[The LORD’s Comfort for Zion]

17Wake yourself, wake yourself, stand up, O Jerusalem, you who have drunk from the hand of the LORD the cup of his wrath, who have drunk to the dregs the bowl, the cup of staggering. 18There is none to guide her among all the sons she has borne; there is none to take her by the hand among all the sons she has brought up. 19These two things have happened to you—who will console you?—devastation and destruction, famine and sword; who will comfort you? 20Your sons have fainted; they lie at the head of every street like an antelope in a net; they are full of the wrath of the LORD, the rebuke of your God. 21Therefore hear this, you who are afflicted, who are drunk, but not with wine: 22Thus says your Lord, the LORD, your God who pleads the cause of his people: “Behold, I have taken from your hand the cup of staggering; the bowl of my wrath you shall drink no more; 23and I will put it into the hand of your tormentors, who have said to you, ‘Bow down, that we may pass over’; and you have made your back like the ground and like the street for them to pass over.”

The LORD’s Coming Salvation

52:1Awake, awake, put on your strength, O Zion; put on your beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; for there shall no more come into you the uncircumcised and the unclean. 2Shake yourself from the dust and arise; be seated, O Jerusalem; loose the bonds from your neck, O captive daughter of Zion. 3For thus says the LORD: “You were sold for nothing, and you shall be redeemed without money.” 4For thus says the Lord GOD: “My people went down at the first into Egypt to sojourn there, and the Assyrian oppressed them for nothing. 5Now therefore what have I here,” declares the LORD, “seeing that my people are taken away for nothing? Their rulers wail,” declares the LORD, “and continually all the day my name is despised. 6Therefore my people shall know my name. Therefore in that day they shall know that it is I who speak; here am I.” 7How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him who brings good news, who publishes peace, who brings good news of happiness, who publishes salvation, who says to Zion, “Your God reigns.” 8The voice of your watchmen—they lift up their voice; together they sing for joy; for eye to eye they see the return of the LORD to Zion. 9Break forth together into singing, you waste places of Jerusalem, for the LORD has comforted his people; he has redeemed Jerusalem. 10The LORD has bared his holy arm before the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. 11Depart, depart, go out from there; touch no unclean thing; go out from the midst of her; purify yourselves, you who bear the vessels of the LORD. 12For you shall not go out in haste, and you shall not go in flight, for the LORD will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rear guard.

## New Testament Reading: Matthew 2:1–12

The Visit of the Wise Men

1Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, 2saying, “Where is he who has been born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.” 3When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him; 4and assembling all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born. 5They told him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for so it is written by the prophet: 6“‘And you, O Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah; for from you shall come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel.’” 7Then Herod summoned the wise men secretly and ascertained from them what time the star had appeared. 8And he sent them to Bethlehem, saying, “Go and search diligently for the child, and when you have found him, bring me word, that I too may come and worship him.” 9After listening to the king, they went on their way. And behold, the star that they had seen when it rose went before them until it came to rest over the place where the child was. 10When they saw the star, they rejoiced exceedingly with great joy. 11And going into the house they saw the child with Mary his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him. Then, opening their treasures, they offered him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh. 12And being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed to their own country by another way.

## Writing

Give no opportunity to the heathen, lest the godly many be blasphemed because of the foolish few. For, “woe to him through whose foolishness My name is blasphemed among any people” [cf. Isaiah 52:5]. Therefore, be deaf whenever someone speaks to you apart from Jesus Christ, who is of the line of David, who is of Mary, who was truly born, both ate and drank, truly suffered under Pontius Pilate, was truly crucified and died, while those in heaven and on the earth and under the earth witnessed it; who also truly was raised from the dead, His Father having raised Him; this one, His Father, will in the same way, in Christ Jesus, raise us who believe in Him, without whom we do not have true life. But if, as certain atheists, that is, unbelievers, say He only appeared to suffer—they themselves only appear to be!—why am I a prisoner? Why indeed do I pray to fight with the beasts? If so, I would be dying for no reason—what’s more I would then be lying about the Lord. Therefore, flee the evil offshoots that bear deadly fruit; if someone tastes it, he dies immediately. For these are not the planting of the Father. For if they were, they would show themselves to be branches of the cross, and their fruit would be incorruptible; through the cross, by His suffering, He called you to be His members, since the head is not able to be born without members.
—Ignatius of Antioch

## Hymnody

Whom the sages
   And the ages
Eagerly awaited,
   Angels proudly
   Herald loudly
In their songs elated.
Let us, too, in these days,
Thankful hearts gladly raise;
   To the tender
   Infant render
All our praise,
   To the tender
   Infant render
All our praise.
—Let Our Gladness Banish Sadness (LSB 371:2)

## Prayer of the Day

Merciful Lord, cast the bright beams of Your light upon Your Church that we, being instructed in the doctrine of Your blessed apostle and evangelist John, may come to the light of everlasting life; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (F04) St. John, Apostle and Evangelist St. John was a son of Zebedee and brother of James the Elder (whose festival day is July 25). John was among the first disciples to be called by Jesus (Matthew 4:18–22) and became known as “the disciple whom Jesus loved,” as he refers to himself in the Gospel that bears his name (e.g., John 21:20). Of the Twelve, John alone did not forsake Jesus in the hours of His suffering and death. With the faithful women, he stood at the cross, where our Lord made him the guardian of His mother. After Pentecost, John spent his ministry in Jerusalem and at Ephesus, where tradition says he was bishop. He wrote the fourth Gospel, the three Epistles that bear his name, and the Book of Revelation. Especially memorable in his Gospel are the account of the wedding at Cana (John 2:1–12), the “Gospel in a nutshell” (John 3:16), Jesus’ saying about the Good Shepherd (John 10:11–16), the raising of Lazarus from the dead (John 11), and Jesus’ encounter with Mary Magdalene on Easter morning (John 20:11–18). According to tradition, John was banished to the island of Patmos (off the coast of Asia Minor) by the Roman emperor Domitian. John lived to a very old age, surviving all the apostles, and died at Ephesus around AD 100.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Large Catechism I 245–253

[245] In short, if you steal much, you can expect that much will be stolen from you. He who robs and gets by violence and wrong will submit to one who shall act the same way toward him. For God is master of this art. Since everyone robs and steals from one another, God punishes one thief by means of another. Or else where would we find enough gallows and ropes?

[246] Now, whoever is willing to be instructed, let him know that this is God’s commandment. It must not be treated as a joke. For although you despise, defraud, steal, and rob us, we will indeed manage to endure your arrogance, suffer, and—according to the Lord’s Prayer—forgive and show pity [Matthew 6:12]. For we know that the godly shall nevertheless have enough [Psalm 37:25]. But you injure yourself more than another.

[247] Beware of this: The poor man will come to you (there are so many now). He must buy things with the penny of his daily wages and live upon it. When you are harsh to him, as though everyone lived by your favor, and you skin and scrape him to the bone, and when you turn him away with pride and arrogance to whom you ought to give things without payment, he will go away wretched and sorrowful. Since he can complain to no one else, he will cry and call to heaven [Psalm 20:6; 146:8–9]. Then beware (I say again) as of the devil himself. For such groaning and calling will be no joke. It will have a weight that will prove too heavy for you and all the world. For it will reach Him who takes care of the poor, sorrowful hearts. He will not allow them to go unavenged [Isaiah 61:1–3]. But if you despise this and become defiant, see the One you have brought upon you. If you succeed and prosper, before all the world you may call God and me a liar.

[248] We have exhorted, warned, and protested enough. He who will not listen to or believe this commandment may go on until he learns this by experience. Yet it must be impressed upon the young [Deuteronomy 6:7] so that they may be careful not to follow the old lawless crowd, but keep their eyes fixed upon God’s commandment, lest His wrath and punishment come upon them too.

[249] It is necessary for us to do no more than to teach and to warn with God’s Word. But to check such open greediness there is need for the princes and government. They themselves should take note and have the courage to establish and maintain order in all kinds of trade and commerce. They must do this lest the poor be burdened and oppressed and the leaders themselves be burdened with other people’s sins.

[250] This is enough of an explanation of what stealing is. Let the commandment not be understood too narrowly. But let it apply to everything that has to do with our neighbors. Briefly, in summary (as in the former commandments) this is what is forbidden: (a) To do our neighbor any injury or wrong (in any conceivable manner, by impeding, hindering, and withholding his possessions and property), or even to consent or allow such injury. Instead, we should interfere and prevent it.

[251] (b) It is commanded that we advance and improve his possessions. When they suffer lack, we should help, share, and lend both to friends and foes [Matthew 5:42].

[252] Whoever now seeks and desires good works will find here more than enough to do that are heartily acceptable and pleasing to God. In addition, they are favored and crowned with excellent blessings. So we are to be richly compensated for all that we do for our neighbor’s good and from friendship. King Solomon also teaches this in Proverbs 19:17, “Whoever is generous to the poor lends to the LORD, and He will repay him for his deed.”

[253] Here, then, you have a rich Lord. He is certainly enough for you. He will not allow you to come up short in anything or to lack [Psalm 37:25]. So you can with a joyful conscience enjoy a hundred times more than you could scrape together with unfaithfulness and wrong. Now, whoever does not desire this blessing will find enough wrath and misfortune.

THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT
