# Friday after Ash Wednesday

## Psalmody

1I will give thanks to the LORD with my | whole heart;* I will recount all of your won- | derful deeds. 2I will be glad and ex- | ult in you;* I will sing praise to your name, | O Most High. 3When my enemies | turn back,* they stumble and perish before your | presence. 4For you have maintained my | just cause;* you have sat on the throne, giving righteous | judgment. 5You have rebuked the nations; you have made the wicked | perish;* you have blotted out their name forever and | ever. 6The enemy came to an end in everlasting ruins; their cities you | rooted out;the* very memory of them has | perished. 7But the LORD sits enthroned for- | ever;he* has established his throne for | justice, 8and he judges the world with | righteousness;he* judges the peoples with up- | rightness.—Psalm 9:1–8
Additional Psalm: Psalm 9, Psalm 38

## Old Testament Reading: Genesis 2:4–25

The Creation of Man and Woman

4These are the generations of the heavens and the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens. 5When no bush of the field was yet in the land and no small plant of the field had yet sprung up—for the LORD God had not caused it to rain on the land, and there was no man to work the ground, 6and a mist was going up from the land and was watering the whole face of the ground—7then the LORD God formed the man of dust from the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living creature. 8And the LORD God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, and there he put the man whom he had formed. 9And out of the ground the LORD God made to spring up every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food. The tree of life was in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. 10A river flowed out of Eden to water the garden, and there it divided and became four rivers. 11The name of the first is the Pishon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold. 12And the gold of that land is good; bdellium and onyx stone are there. 13The name of the second river is the Gihon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Cush. 14And the name of the third river is the Tigris, which flows east of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates. 15The LORD God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to work it and keep it. 16And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, “You may surely eat of every tree of the garden, 17but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die.” 18Then the LORD God said, “It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him.” 19Now out of the ground the LORD God had formed every beast of the field and every bird of the heavens and brought them to the man to see what he would call them. And whatever the man called every living creature, that was its name. 20The man gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field. But for Adam there was not found a helper fit for him. 21So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and while he slept took one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh. 22And the rib that the LORD God had taken from the man he made into a woman and brought her to the man. 23Then the man said, “This at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.” 24Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and they shall become one flesh. 25And the man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed.

## New Testament Reading: Mark 1:29–45

Jesus Heals Many

29And immediately he left the synagogue and entered the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. 30Now Simon’s mother-in-law lay ill with a fever, and immediately they told him about her. 31And he came and took her by the hand and lifted her up, and the fever left her, and she began to serve them. 32That evening at sundown they brought to him all who were sick or oppressed by demons. 33And the whole city was gathered together at the door. 34And he healed many who were sick with various diseases, and cast out many demons. And he would not permit the demons to speak, because they knew him.

Jesus Preaches in Galilee

35And rising very early in the morning, while it was still dark, he departed and went out to a desolate place, and there he prayed. 36And Simon and those who were with him searched for him, 37and they found him and said to him, “Everyone is looking for you.” 38And he said to them, “Let us go on to the next towns, that I may preach there also, for that is why I came out.” 39And he went throughout all Galilee, preaching in their synagogues and casting out demons.

Jesus Cleanses a Leper

40And a leper came to him, imploring him, and kneeling said to him, “If you will, you can make me clean.” 41Moved with pity, he stretched out his hand and touched him and said to him, “I will; be clean.” 42And immediately the leprosy left him, and he was made clean. 43And Jesus sternly charged him and sent him away at once, 44and said to him, “See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing what Moses commanded, for a proof to them.” 45But he went out and began to talk freely about it, and to spread the news, so that Jesus could no longer openly enter a town, but was out in desolate places, and people were coming to him from every quarter.

## Writing

The good God permits such small evils to befall us merely in order to arouse us snorers from our deep sleep and to make us recognize, on the other hand, the incomparable and innumerable benefits we still have. He wants us to consider what would happen if He were to withdraw His goodness from us completely. In that spirit Job said (2:10): “Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?” … [Job] said (Job 1:21): “As God wills, so let it be; the name of the Lord be praised.” He did not simply look at the evil, as we would-be saints do; he kept in sight the goodness and grace of the Lord. With this he comforted himself and overcame evil with patience. We also are to look at our misfortunes in no other way than that with them God gives us a light by which we may see and understand His goodness and kindness in countless other ways. Then we conclude that such small misfortunes are barely a drop of water on a big fire or a little spark in the ocean. Then we understand and love the words: “O give thanks to the Lord, for He is good; His steadfast love endures forever!”—martin luther

## Hymnody

Your touch then, Lord, brought life and health, Gave speech and strength
and sight; And youth renewed and frenzy calmed Revealed You, Lord of
light. And now, O Lord, be near to bless, Almighty as before, In crowded
street, by beds of pain, As by Gennes’ret’s shore.—Your Hand, O Lord, in
Days of Old (LSB 846:2)

## Prayer of the Day

O God, You declare Your almighty power above all in showing mercy and pity. Mercifully grant us such a measure of Your grace that we may obtain Your gracious promises and be made partakers of Your heavenly treasures; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (H70)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord, Summary, Foundation, Rule, and Norm 9–13

[9] For the controversies that have happened are not (as some would regard them) mere misunderstandings or disputes about words ‹as are apt to occur›, with one side failing to grasp the meaning of the other well enough and the difficulty lying in a few words that are not of great importance. The controversial subjects are important and great. They are of such a nature that the opinion of the party in error cannot be tolerated in God’s Church, much less be excused or defended.

[10] Necessity requires us to explain these disputed articles according to God’s Word and approved writings. Everyone who has Christian understanding can notice which opinion about the controversial matters agrees with God’s Word and the Christian Augsburg Confession, and which does not. Then sincere Christians who have the truth at heart may guard and protect themselves flee and avoid› against the errors and corruptions that have arisen.

## THE COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY, FOUNDATION, RULE, AND NORM

By Which All Dogmas Should Be Judged according to God’s Word, and the Controversies That Have Arisen Should Be Explained and Decided in a Christian Way

[1] For thorough, permanent unity in the Church, it is necessary, above all things, that we have a comprehensive, unanimously approved summary and form of teaching. The common doctrine must be brought together from God’s Word and reduced to a small circle of teaching, which the churches that are of the true Christian religion must confess. They must do this just as the Ancient Church always had its fixed symbols for this use.

[2] Furthermore, this should not be based on private writings, but on the kind of books that have been composed, approved, and received in the name of the churches that pledge themselves to one doctrine and religion. Therefore, we have declared to one another with heart and mouth that we will not make or receive a separate or new confession of our faith. Instead, we will confess the public common writings, which always and everywhere were held and used as such symbols or common confessions in all the churches of the Augsburg Confession before the disagreements arose among those who accept the Augsburg Confession. We will confess them as long as there are on all sides, in all articles, a unanimous adherence to ‹and maintenance and use of› the pure doctrine of the divine Word, as the sainted Dr. Luther explained it.

[3] 1. First, ‹we receive and embrace with our whole heart› are the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as the pure, clear fountain of Israel. They are the only true standard or norm by which all teachers and doctrines are to be judged.

[4] 2. In ancient times the true Christian doctrine, in a pure, sound sense, was collected from God’s Word into brief articles or chapters against the corruption of heretics. Therefore, we confess, in the second place, the three Ecumenical Creeds: the Apostles’, the Nicene, and the Athanasian. They are glorious confessions of the faith, brief, devout, and founded on God’s Word. All the heresies that had at that time arisen in the Christian Church are clearly and irrefutably answered by these creeds.

[5] 3. In the third place, in these last times, by special grace, God has brought the truth of His Word to light again from the darkness of the papacy through the faithful service of the precious man of God, Dr. Luther. According to the Word of God, this doctrine has been collected from it into the articles and chapters of the Augsburg Confession against the corruptions of the papacy and other sects. Therefore, we also confess the first, unaltered Augsburg Confession as our symbol for this time. This is not because it was written by our theologians. We confess it because it has been taken from God’s Word and well founded firmly in the Word of God. We confess it precisely in the form in which it was committed to writing, in the year 1530, and presented to Emperor Charles V at Augsburg by some Christian electors, princes, and estates of the Roman Empire as a common Confession of the reformed churches. By this Confession, our reformed churches are distinguished from (a) the papists and (b) other rejected and condemned sects and heresies. This follows the custom and usage of the early Church, just as later councils, Christian bishops, and teachers appealed to the Nicene Creed, and confessed it.

[6] 4. In the fourth place, an extensive Apology was composed, published, and printed in 1531 regarding the proper and true sense of the oft-quoted Augsburg Confession. This was done after the Confession’s presentation, so that we might explain ourselves at greater length and guard against the papists. This was also done so that condemned errors might not sneak into God’s Church under the Augsburg Confession’s name or dare to seek cover under it. We unanimously confess this Apology also. Not only is the Augsburg Confession explained by the Apology (as much as is necessary and guarded), but it is also proven by clear, irrefutable testimonies of Holy Scripture.

[7] 5. In the fifth place, we also confess the Articles composed, approved, and received at Smalcald, in the great assembly of theologians, in the year 1537. We confess them as they were first framed and printed in order to be delivered in the Council at Mantua (or wherever it would be held) in the name of the estates, electors, and princes. They confessed it as an explanation of the above-mentioned Augsburg Confession, in which, by God’s grace, they were resolved to abide. In the Smalcald Articles the Augsburg Confession’s doctrine is repeated and some articles are explained at greater length from God’s Word. Besides this, the cause and reasons are indicated, as far as necessary, why we have abandoned the papistic errors and idolatries and can have no fellowship with them. They also explain why we do not know, and cannot think of, a way for coming to any agreement with the pope on these points.

[8] 6. In the sixth place, these highly important matters also concern the common people and laymen. Because they are Christians, they must distinguish between pure and false doctrine for their salvation. Therefore, we also confess the Small and the Large Catechisms of Dr. Luther, as they were written by him and included in his works. They have been unanimously approved and received by all churches holding to the Augsburg Confession and have been publicly used in churches, schools, and in homes. Furthermore, the Christian doctrine from God’s Word is put together in them in the most correct and simple way and explained, as far as is necessary for simple laypeople›.

[9] In the pure churches and schools these public, common writings have always been respected as the sum and model of the doctrine that Dr. Luther (of blessed memory) has admirably pulled together from God’s Word and firmly established against the papacy and other sects. We want to appeal to his full explanations in his doctrinal and polemical writings. We do so in the same way and as far as Dr. Luther himself has given necessary and Christian encouragement about his writings in the Latin preface to his published works [LW 34:327–38]. He has clearly drawn up this distinction: God’s Word alone should be and remain the only standard and rule of doctrine, to which the writings of no man should be regarded as equal. Everything should be subjected to God’s Word.

[10] Other good, useful, pure books, expositions of the Holy Scriptures, refutations of errors, and explanations of doctrinal articles are not rejected by this point. As long as they are consistent with the above-mentioned type of doctrine, these works are considered useful expositions and explanations. They can be helpful. What has been said so far about the summary of our Christian doctrine is only intended to mean this: we should have a unanimously accepted, definite, common form of doctrine. All our evangelical churches should confess it together and in common. Because this Confession has been derived from God’s Word, all other writings should be judged and adjusted to it to determine the extent to which they are to be approved and accepted.

[11] For this purpose we brought together the above-mentioned writings: the Augsburg Confession, Apology, Smalcald Articles, Luther’s Large and Small Catechisms as the frequently mentioned summary of our Christian doctrine. This was done because these have always and everywhere been regarded as the common, unanimously accepted meaning of our churches. Furthermore, they have been signed at that time by the chief and most enlightened theologians, and they have held sway in all evangelical churches and schools.

[12] Also, as mentioned before, they were all written and sent out before the divisions among the theologians of the Augsburg Confession arose. Therefore, they are held to be impartial, and neither can nor should be rejected by either side of those who have entered into controversy. No one who is a follower of the Augsburg Confession without guile will complain about these writings. They will cheerfully accept and tolerate them as witnesses of the truth. No one can think ill about us because we get an explanation and decision about the articles in controversy from these writings.

[13] As we lay down God’s Word—the eternal truth—as the foundation, we also introduce and quote these writings as a witness of the truth and as the unanimously received, correct understanding of our predecessors who have steadfastly held to the pure doctrine.
