# Friday — Lent 1

## Psalmody

25Whom have I in | heaven but you?* And there is nothing on earth that I desire be- | sides you. 26My flesh and my | heart may fail,* but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for- | ever. 27For behold, those who are far from you shall | perish;you* put an end to everyone who is unfaithful | to you. 28But for me it is good to be | near God;* I have made the Lord GOD my refuge, that I may tell of | all your works.—Psalm 73:25–28
Additional Psalm: Psalm 133, Psalm 38

## Old Testament Reading: Genesis 13:1–18

Abram and Lot Separate

1So Abram went up from Egypt, he and his wife and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the Negeb. 2Now Abram was very rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold. 3And he journeyed on from the Negeb as far as Bethel to the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai, 4to the place where he had made an altar at the first. And there Abram called upon the name of the LORD. 5And Lot, who went with Abram, also had flocks and herds and tents, 6so that the land could not support both of them dwelling together; for their possessions were so great that they could not dwell together, 7and there was strife between the herdsmen of Abram’s livestock and the herdsmen of Lot’s livestock. At that time the Canaanites and the Perizzites were dwelling in the land. 8Then Abram said to Lot, “Let there be no strife between you and me, and between your herdsmen and my herdsmen, for we are kinsmen. 9Is not the whole land before you? Separate yourself from me. If you take the left hand, then I will go to the right, or if you take the right hand, then I will go to the left.” 10And Lot lifted up his eyes and saw that the Jordan Valley was well watered everywhere like the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, in the direction of Zoar. (This was before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.) 11So Lot chose for himself all the Jor-dan Valley, and Lot journeyed east. Thus they separated from each other. 12Abram settled in the land of Canaan, while Lot settled among the cities of the valley and moved his tent as far as Sodom. 13Now the men of Sodom were wicked, great sinners against the LORD. 14The LORD said to Abram, after Lot had separated from him, “Lift up your eyes and look from the place where you are, northward and southward and eastward and westward, 15for all the land that you see I will give to you and to your offspring forever. 16I will make your offspring as the dust of the earth, so that if one can count the dust of the earth, your offspring also can be counted. 17Arise, walk through the length and the breadth of the land, for I will give it to you.” 18So Abram moved his tent and came and settled by the oaks of Mamre, which are at Hebron, and there he built an altar to the LORD. Additional Reading: Genesis 14:1–24

## New Testament Reading: Mark 5:1–20

Jesus Heals a Man with a Demon

1They came to the other side of the sea, to the country of the Gerasenes. 2And when Jesus had stepped out of the boat, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit. 3He lived among the tombs. And no one could bind him anymore, not even with a chain, 4for he had often been bound with shackles and chains, but he wrenched the chains apart, and he broke the shackles in pieces. No one had the strength to subdue him. 5Night and day among the tombs and on the mountains he was always crying out and cutting himself with stones. 6And when he saw Jesus from afar, he ran and fell down before him. 7And crying out with a loud voice, he said, “What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I adjure you by God, do not torment me.” 8For he was saying to him, “Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!” 9And Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” He replied, “My name is Legion, for we are many.” 10And he begged him earnestly not to send them out of the country. 11Now a great herd of pigs was feeding there on the hillside, 12and they begged him, saying, “Send us to the pigs; let us enter them.” 13So he gave them permission. And the unclean spirits came out, and entered the pigs, and the herd, numbering about two thousand, rushed down the steep bank into the sea and were drowned in the sea. 14The herdsmen fled and told it in the city and in the country. And people came to see what it was that had happened. 15And they came to Jesus and saw the demon-possessed man, the one who had had the legion, sitting there, clothed and in his right mind, and they were afraid. 16And those who had seen it described to them what had happened to the demon- possessed man and to the pigs. 17And they began to beg Jesus to depart from their region. 18As he was getting into the boat, the man who had been possessed with demons begged him that he might be with him. 19And he did not permit him but said to him, “Go home to your friends and tell them how much the Lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you.” 20And he went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him, and everyone marveled.

## Writing

We teach that it is necessary to do good works. This does not mean that we merit grace by doing good works, but [they are necessary and we should do them] because it is God’s will [Ephesians 2:10]. It is only by faith, and nothing else, that forgiveness of sins is apprehended. The Holy Spirit is received through faith, hearts are renewed and given new affections, and then they are able to bring forth good works. Ambrose says: “Faith is the mother of a good will and doing what is right.” Without the Holy Spirit people are full of ungodly desires. They are too weak to do works that are good in God’s sight [John 15:5]. Besides, they are in the power of the devil, who pushes human beings into various sins, ungodly opinions, and open crimes. We see this in the philosophers, who, although they tried to live an honest life could not succeed, but were defiled with many open crimes. Such is human weakness, without faith and without the Holy Spirit, when governed only by human strength. Therefore, it is easy to see that this doctrine is not to be accused of banning good works. Instead, it is to be commended all the more because it shows how we are enabled to do good works. For without faith, human nature cannot, in any way, do the works of the First or Second Commandment [1 Corinthians 2:14]. Without faith, human nature does not call upon God, nor expect anything from Him, nor bear the cross [Matthew 16:24]. Instead, human nature seeks and trusts in human help. So when there is no faith and trust in God, all kinds of lusts and human intentions rule in the heart [Genesis 6:5]. This is why Christ says, “Apart from Me you can do nothing” (John 15:5). That is why the Church sings: “Lacking Your divine favor, there is nothing in man. Nothing in him is harmless.”—Augsburg Confession XX 27–40

## Hymnody

Manifest in making whole Palsied limbs and fainting soul; Manifest in
valiant fight, Quelling all the devil’s might; Manifest in gracious will, Ever
bringing good from ill; Anthems be to Thee addressed, God in man made
manifest.—Songs of Thankfulness and Praise (LSB 394:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus, Son of the Most High God, You freed many from their bondage to demons, demonstrating Your power over the evil one. Show us Your mercy when we are overcome by the darkness of sin, death, and the devil, and protect us by Your mighty Word that does what it says; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1003) Lenten Catechesis: The Seventh and Eighth Commandments You shall not steal. God also wants property protected. He has commanded that no one shall take away from, or diminish, his neighbor’s possessions. For to steal is nothing else than to get possession of another’s property wrongfully.—Large Catechism I 223–224 Consider a manservant or maidservant who does not serve faithfully in the house, does damage, or allows damage to be done when it could be prevented. He ruins and neglects the goods entrusted to him, by laziness, idleness, or hate, to the spite and sorrow of master and mistress. In whatever way this can be done purposely (I’m not talking about what happens by mistake and against one’s will), you can in a year steal thirty or forty florins.—Large Catechism I 225 This is what is forbidden: (a) To do our neighbor any injury or wrong (in any conceivable manner, by impeding, hindering, and withholding his possessions and property), or even to consent or allow such injury. Instead, we should interfere and prevent it. (b) It is commanded that we advance and improve his possessions. When they suffer lack, we should help, share, and lend both to friends and foes [Matthew 5:42].—Large Catechism I 250 You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor. Over and above our own body, spouse, and temporal possessions, we still have another treasure—honor and good reputation [Proverbs 22:1]. … It is intolerable to live among people in open shame and general contempt. Therefore, God does not want the reputation, good name, and upright character of our neighbor to be taken away or diminished.—Large Catechism I 255–256 [The eighth commandment] forbids all sins of the tongue [James 3], by which we may injure or confront our neighbor. … God prohibits whatever is done with the tongue against a fellow man. This applies to false preachers with their doctrine and blasphemy, false judges and witnesses with their verdict, or outside of court by lying and speaking evil. Here belongs the detestable, shameful vice of speaking behind a person’s back and slandering, to which the devil spurs us on, and of which much could be said. For it is a common evil plague that everyone prefers hearing evil more than hearing good about his neighbor.—Large Catechism I 263–264

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord I 50–57

[50] For terms and expressions, it is best and safest to use and retain the form of sound words used about this article in the Holy Scriptures and the above-mentioned books.

[51] To avoid argument about words and expressions, which are applied and used in various senses, they should be carefully and distinctly explained. For example, it is said that God creates the nature of people. By the term nature the essence, body, and soul of people are understood. But often the character or disposition of a thing is called its nature. For example, it is said that it is the nature of the serpent to bite and poison. In a similar way, Luther says that sin and sinning are the character and nature of corrupt mankind [LW 14:169].

[52] Original sin properly means the deep corruption of our nature, as it is described in the Smalcald Articles. But sometimes the concrete person or the subject (i.e., a person himself with body and soul, in which sin is and dwells) is also included under this term, because a person is corrupted by sin, poisoned, and sinful. For example, Luther says, “Your birth, your nature, and your entire essence is sin,” that is, sinful and unclean [LW 12:307–8, 310, 348].

[53] Luther himself explains that by “naturesin,” “person-sin,” and “essential sin” he means that not only the words, thoughts, and works are sin, but that the entire nature, person, and essence of a person are altogether corrupted from the root by original sin [LW 52:152; 12:11, 351].

[54] A congregation of ordinary people ought to be spared the Latin words substantia and accidens in public sermons, for they are unknown to ordinary people. But learned people among themselves, or with others to whom these words are not unknown, may use such terms in discussing this subject, as Eusebius, Ambrose, and especially Augustine, and also still other eminent Church teachers have done. For these terms were necessary to explain this doctrine in opposition to the heretics. The terms assume a division that has no middle ground. So everything that exists must be either substantia (i.e., a self-existent essence) or accidens (i.e., an outward thing that does not exist by itself essentially, but is in another self-existent essence and can be distinguished from it). Cyril and Basil also use this distinction.

[55] Among others, the following is a sure, indisputable axiom in theology: every substantia or self-existing essence (so long as it is a substance) is either God Himself or God’s work and creation. In many writings against the Manichaeans, in common with all true teachers, Augustine has condemned and rejected the following statement after due consideration and with seriousness: original sin is man’s nature or substance. Like Augustine, all the learned and intelligent have also always maintained: when something does not exist by itself—it is not a part of another selfexisting essence, but exists, subject to change, in another thing—it is not a substantia. That is, it is not something self-existing. Instead, it is an accidens. That is, it is something accidental. So Augustine is accustomed to speak in this way constantly: original sin is not human nature itself, but an accidental defect and damage in human nature.

[56] Before this controversy, people spoke in this way, also in our schools and churches, according to the rules of logic, freely and without being suspected of heresy. They were never condemned on this account either by Dr. Luther or any orthodox teacher of our pure, evangelical churches.

[57] It is the indisputable truth that everything that is, is either a substance or an accident (i.e., either a self-existing essence or something accidental in it). This has just been shown and proven by testimonies of the Church teachers. No truly intelligent person has ever had any doubts about this. Therefore, necessity constrains here, and no one can avoid it. If the question is asked whether original sin is a substance (that is, something existing by itself and not in something else) or whether it is a nonessential quality, that is, something not existing by itself but in another, one must confess directly and firmly that original sin is no substance, but an accident (nonessential quality).
