# Ash Wednesday

## Psalmody

1 Give thanks to the LORD, for | he is good,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever.
2 Give thanks to the | God of gods,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever.
3 Give thanks to the | Lord of lords,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever;
4 to him who alone does great | wonders,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever;
5 to him who by understanding made the | heavens,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever;
6 to him who spread out the earth above the | waters,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever;
7 to him who made the | great lights,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever;
8 the sun to rule o- | ver the day,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever;
9 the moon and stars to rule o- | ver the night,* for his steadfast love endures for- | ever;—Psalm 136:1–9
Additional Psalm: Psalm 90, Psalm 6

## Old Testament Reading: Genesis 1:1–19

The Creation of the World

1In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth. 2The earth was without form and void, and darkness was over the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters. 3And God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light. 4And God saw that the light was good. And God separated the light from the darkness. 5God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, the first day. 6And God said, “Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters.” 7And God made the expanse and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse. And it was so. 8And God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, the second day. 9And God said, “Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear.” And it was so. 10God called the dry land Earth, and the waters that were gathered together he called Seas. And God saw that it was good. 11And God said, “Let the earth sprout vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind, on the earth.” And it was so. 12The earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed according to their own kinds, and trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. 13And there was evening and there was morning, the third day. 14And God said, “Let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night. And let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and years, 15and let them be lights in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth.” And it was so. 16And God made the two great lights—the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night—and the stars. 17And God set them in the expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth, 18to rule over the day and over the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. And God saw that it was good. 19And there was evening and there was morning, the fourth day.

## New Testament Reading: Mark 1:1–13

John the Baptist Prepares the Way

1The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. 2As it is written in Isaiah the prophet, “Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way, 3the voice of one crying in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight,’” 4John appeared, baptizing in the wilderness and proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins. 5And all the country of Judea and all Jerusalem were going out to him and were being baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins. 6Now John was clothed with camel’s hair and wore a leather belt around his waist and ate locusts and wild honey. 7And he preached, saying, “After me comes he who is mightier than I, the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie. 8I have baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”

The Baptism of Jesus

9In those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan. 10And when he came up out of the water, immediately he saw the heavens being torn open and the Spirit descending on him like a dove. 11And a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.”

The Temptation of Jesus

12The Spirit immediately drove him out into the wilderness. 13And he was in the wilderness forty days, being tempted by Satan. And he was with the wild animals, and the angels were ministering to him.

## Writing

This is what true repentance means. Here a person needs to hear something like this, “You are all of no account, whether you are obvious sinners or saints ‹in your own opinions›. You have to become different from what you are now. You have to act differently than you are now acting, whether you are as great, wise, powerful, and holy as you can be. Here no one is godly.” But to this office of the Law, the New Testament immediately adds the consoling promise of grace through the Gospel. This must be believed. As Christ declares, “Repent and believe in the gospel” (Mark 1:15). That is, become different, act differently, and believe My promise. John the Baptist (preceding Christ) is called a preacher of repentance, but this is for the forgiveness of sins. That is, John was to accuse all and convict them of being sinners. This is so they can know what they are before God and acknowledge that they are lost. So they can be prepared for the Lord [Mark 1:3] to receive grace and to expect and accept from Him the forgiveness of sins. This is what Christ Himself says, “Repentance and forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in [My] name to all nations” (Luke 24:47).—Smalcald Articles III III 3–6

## Hymnody

When all the world was cursed By Moses’ condemnation, Saint John the
Baptist came With words of consolation.With true forerunner’s zeal The
greater One he named, And Him, as yet unknown, As Savior he proclaimed.
—When All the World Was Cursed (LSB 346:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty and everlasting God, You despise nothing You have made and forgive the sins of all who are penitent. Create in us new and contrite hearts that lamenting our sins and acknowledging our wretchedness we may receive from You full pardon and forgiveness; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L22) Lent and Ash Wednesday During the forty days of Lent, God’s baptized people cleanse their hearts through the discipline of Lent: repentance, prayer, fasting, and almsgiving. Lent is a time in which God’s people prepare with joy for the Paschal Feast (Easter). It is a time in which God renews His people’s zeal in faith and life. It is a time in which we pray that we may be given the fullness of grace that belongs to the children of God.

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord, Introduction

## THE FORMULA OF CONCORD

[1] By the Almighty’s special grace and mercy, the teaching about the chief articles of our Christian religion (which under the papacy had been horribly clouded by human teachings and ordinances) had been explained and purified again from God’s Word by Dr. Luther, of blessed and holy memory. The papistic errors, abuses, and idolatries had been rebuked by him.

[2] Nevertheless, this pure reformation was regarded by its opponents as a new teaching. It was violently (though without foundation) charged with being entirely against God’s Word and the Christian ordinances. In addition, the Reformation was burdened by unsupportable slanders and accusations.

[3] The Christian electors, princes, and estates ‹of the Empire› at that time had embraced the pure doctrine of the Holy Gospel. They also had their churches reformed in a Christian manner according to God’s Word. At the great Diet of Augsburg in the year 1530 they had a Christian Confession prepared from God’s Word and delivered to Emperor Charles V. In this way they clearly and plainly made their Christian Confession about what was being held and taught in the Christian evangelical churches on the chief articles. They focused especially on the articles in controversy between themselves and the papists. Although this Confession was received with disfavor by their opponents, still, thank God, it remains unrefuted and undefeated to this day.

[4] To this Christian Augsburg Confession, so thoroughly grounded in God’s Word, we here pledge ourselves ‹publicly and solemnly› again from our inmost hearts. We abide by its simple, clear, and unadulterated meaning as the words convey it. We regard this Confession as a pure Christian symbol. At the present time, this Confession ought to be found alongside God’s Word among true Christians ‹which pious hearts ought to receive next to the matchless authority [of God’s Word]>. They should act just as in former times when certain great controversies had arisen in God’s Church. Symbols and Confessions were proposed, to which the pure teachers and hearers at that time pledged themselves with heart and mouth.

[5] We intend also, by the Almighty’s grace, to abide faithfully by this Christian Confession (mentioned several times before) until our death just as it was delivered in the year 1530 to Emperor Charles V. Whether in this writing or in any other, it is our plan not to withdraw in the least from that oft-cited Confession, nor to propose another or new Confession.

[6] The Christian doctrine of this Confession has for the most part remained unchallenged, except for what has been challenged by the papists. Yet it cannot be denied that some theologians have departed from some great and important articles of this Confession. Either they have not understood the true meaning of the other articles, or they have not continued steadfastly in them. Occasionally some even tried to attach a foreign meaning to this Confession. At the same time they wanted to be regarded as followers of the Augsburg Confession (and to help themselves and make their boast about it).

[7] Serious and harmful divisions have arisen in the pure evangelical churches from this. The same thing happened during the lives of the holy apostles among those who wanted to be called Christians and boasted of Christ’s doctrine—horrible errors likewise arose. Some sought to be justified and saved by the works of the Law (Acts 15:1–29). Others denied the resurrection of the dead (1 Corinthians 15:12). Still others did not believe that Christ was true and eternal God. The holy apostles had to attack these teachings forcefully in their sermons and writings [Galatians 1:8]. They did this although such fundamental errors and severe controversies could not happen at that time without offense both to unbelievers and to those weak in the faith.

[8] In a similar way our opponents today, the papists, rejoice over the divisions that have arisen among us. They rejoice in the unchristian and vain hope that these disagreements might finally cause the downfall of the pure doctrine. Meanwhile, those who are weak in faith are ‹greatly› offended ‹and disturbed›. Some of them doubt whether, amid such disagreements, the pure doctrine is with us. Still others do not know with whom to side regarding the articles in controversy.

[9] For the controversies that have happened are not (as some would regard them) mere misunderstandings or disputes about words ‹as are apt to occur›, with one side failing to grasp the meaning of the other well enough and the difficulty lying in a few words that are not of great importance. The controversial subjects are important and great. They are of such a nature that the opinion of the party in error cannot be tolerated in God’s Church, much less be excused or defended.

[10] Necessity requires us to explain these disputed articles according to God’s Word and approved writings. Everyone who has Christian understanding can notice which opinion about the controversial matters agrees with God’s Word and the Christian Augsburg Confession, and which does not. Then sincere Christians who have the truth at heart may guard and protect themselves flee and avoid› against the errors and corruptions that have arisen.

## THE COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY, FOUNDATION, RULE, AND NORM

By Which All Dogmas Should Be Judged according to God’s Word, and the Controversies That Have Arisen Should Be Explained and Decided in a Christian Way

[1] For thorough, permanent unity in the Church, it is necessary, above all things, that we have a comprehensive, unanimously approved summary and form of teaching. The common doctrine must be brought together from God’s Word and reduced to a small circle of teaching, which the churches that are of the true Christian religion must confess. They must do this just as the Ancient Church always had its fixed symbols for this use.

[2] Furthermore, this should not be based on private writings, but on the kind of books that have been composed, approved, and received in the name of the churches that pledge themselves to one doctrine and religion. Therefore, we have declared to one another with heart and mouth that we will not make or receive a separate or new confession of our faith. Instead, we will confess the public common writings, which always and everywhere were held and used as such symbols or common confessions in all the churches of the Augsburg Confession before the disagreements arose among those who accept the Augsburg Confession. We will confess them as long as there are on all sides, in all articles, a unanimous adherence to ‹and maintenance and use of› the pure doctrine of the divine Word, as the sainted Dr. Luther explained it.

[3] 1. First, ‹we receive and embrace with our whole heart› are the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as the pure, clear fountain of Israel. They are the only true standard or norm by which all teachers and doctrines are to be judged.

[4] 2. In ancient times the true Christian doctrine, in a pure, sound sense, was collected from God’s Word into brief articles or chapters against the corruption of heretics. Therefore, we confess, in the second place, the three Ecumenical Creeds: the Apostles’, the Nicene, and the Athanasian. They are glorious confessions of the faith, brief, devout, and founded on God’s Word. All the heresies that had at that time arisen in the Christian Church are clearly and irrefutably answered by these creeds.

[5] 3. In the third place, in these last times, by special grace, God has brought the truth of His Word to light again from the darkness of the papacy through the faithful service of the precious man of God, Dr. Luther. According to the Word of God, this doctrine has been collected from it into the articles and chapters of the Augsburg Confession against the corruptions of the papacy and other sects. Therefore, we also confess the first, unaltered Augsburg Confession as our symbol for this time. This is not because it was written by our theologians. We confess it because it has been taken from God’s Word and well founded firmly in the Word of God. We confess it precisely in the form in which it was committed to writing, in the year 1530, and presented to Emperor Charles V at Augsburg by some Christian electors, princes, and estates of the Roman Empire as a common Confession of the reformed churches. By this Confession, our reformed churches are distinguished from (a) the papists and (b) other rejected and condemned sects and heresies. This follows the custom and usage of the early Church, just as later councils, Christian bishops, and teachers appealed to the Nicene Creed, and confessed it.

[6] 4. In the fourth place, an extensive Apology was composed, published, and printed in 1531 regarding the proper and true sense of the oft-quoted Augsburg Confession. This was done after the Confession’s presentation, so that we might explain ourselves at greater length and guard against the papists. This was also done so that condemned errors might not sneak into God’s Church under the Augsburg Confession’s name or dare to seek cover under it. We unanimously confess this Apology also. Not only is the Augsburg Confession explained by the Apology (as much as is necessary and guarded), but it is also proven by clear, irrefutable testimonies of Holy Scripture.

[7] 5. In the fifth place, we also confess the Articles composed, approved, and received at Smalcald, in the great assembly of theologians, in the year 1537. We confess them as they were first framed and printed in order to be delivered in the Council at Mantua (or wherever it would be held) in the name of the estates, electors, and princes. They confessed it as an explanation of the above-mentioned Augsburg Confession, in which, by God’s grace, they were resolved to abide. In the Smalcald Articles the Augsburg Confession’s doctrine is repeated and some articles are explained at greater length from God’s Word. Besides this, the cause and reasons are indicated, as far as necessary, why we have abandoned the papistic errors and idolatries and can have no fellowship with them. They also explain why we do not know, and cannot think of, a way for coming to any agreement with the pope on these points.

[8] 6. In the sixth place, these highly important matters also concern the common people and laymen. Because they are Christians, they must distinguish between pure and false doctrine for their salvation. Therefore, we also confess the Small and the Large Catechisms of Dr. Luther, as they were written by him and included in his works. They have been unanimously approved and received by all churches holding to the Augsburg Confession and have been publicly used in churches, schools, and in homes. Furthermore, the Christian doctrine from God’s Word is put together in them in the most correct and simple way and explained, as far as is necessary for simple laypeople›.

[9] In the pure churches and schools these public, common writings have always been respected as the sum and model of the doctrine that Dr. Luther (of blessed memory) has admirably pulled together from God’s Word and firmly established against the papacy and other sects. We want to appeal to his full explanations in his doctrinal and polemical writings. We do so in the same way and as far as Dr. Luther himself has given necessary and Christian encouragement about his writings in the Latin preface to his published works [LW 34:327–38]. He has clearly drawn up this distinction: God’s Word alone should be and remain the only standard and rule of doctrine, to which the writings of no man should be regarded as equal. Everything should be subjected to God’s Word.

[10] Other good, useful, pure books, expositions of the Holy Scriptures, refutations of errors, and explanations of doctrinal articles are not rejected by this point. As long as they are consistent with the above-mentioned type of doctrine, these works are considered useful expositions and explanations. They can be helpful. What has been said so far about the summary of our Christian doctrine is only intended to mean this: we should have a unanimously accepted, definite, common form of doctrine. All our evangelical churches should confess it together and in common. Because this Confession has been derived from God’s Word, all other writings should be judged and adjusted to it to determine the extent to which they are to be approved and accepted.

[11] For this purpose we brought together the above-mentioned writings: the Augsburg Confession, Apology, Smalcald Articles, Luther’s Large and Small Catechisms as the frequently mentioned summary of our Christian doctrine. This was done because these have always and everywhere been regarded as the common, unanimously accepted meaning of our churches. Furthermore, they have been signed at that time by the chief and most enlightened theologians, and they have held sway in all evangelical churches and schools.

[12] Also, as mentioned before, they were all written and sent out before the divisions among the theologians of the Augsburg Confession arose. Therefore, they are held to be impartial, and neither can nor should be rejected by either side of those who have entered into controversy. No one who is a follower of the Augsburg Confession without guile will complain about these writings. They will cheerfully accept and tolerate them as witnesses of the truth. No one can think ill about us because we get an explanation and decision about the articles in controversy from these writings.

[13] As we lay down God’s Word—the eternal truth—as the foundation, we also introduce and quote these writings as a witness of the truth and as the unanimously received, correct understanding of our predecessors who have steadfastly held to the pure doctrine.

## ANTITHESIS OR FALSE DOCTRINE IN THE DISPUTED ARTICLES

[14] It is not only necessary that the pure, wholesome doctrine be rightly presented for the preservation of pure doctrine and for thorough, permanent, godly unity in the Church, but it is also necessary that the opponents who teach otherwise be reproved (1 Timothy 3; [2 Timothy 3:16;] Titus 1:9). Faithful shepherds, as Luther says, should do both things: (a) feed or nourish the lambs and (b) resist the wolves. Then the sheep may flee from strange voices (John 10:5–12) and may separate the precious from the worthless (Jeremiah 15:19).

[15] Regarding these matters, we have thoroughly and clearly told one another the following: a distinction should and must by all means be kept between (a) unnecessary and useless wrangling (the Church should not allow itself to be disturbed by this, since it destroys more than it builds up) and (b) when the kind of controversy arises that involves the articles of faith or the chief points of Christian doctrine. Then the false, opposite doctrine must be reproved for the defense of the truth.

[16] The aforesaid writings offer the Christian reader—who delights in and has a love for the divine truth—clear and correct information about each and every disputed article of our Christian religion. They show what he should regard and receive as right and true according to God’s Word of the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures. They also show what he should reject, shun, and avoid as false and wrong. The truth must be preserved distinctly and clearly and distinguished from all errors. Nothing must be hidden and concealed under common words. Therefore, we have clearly and directly declared ourselves to one another on the chief and most important articles taken one by one. At the present time these articles have come into controversy so that there might be a public, definite testimony, not only for those now living, but also for our descendants. We make known what is and should remain the unanimous understanding and judgment ‹decision› of our churches in reference to the articles in controversy:

[17] 1. First, we reject and condemn all heresies and errors that were rejected and condemned in the primitive, ancient, orthodox Church, on the true, firm ground of the holy, divine Scriptures.

[18] 2. Second, as just mentioned, we reject and condemn all sects and heresies that are rejected in the writings of the comprehensive summary of the Confession of our churches.

[19] 3. Third, within thirty years divisions arose among some theologians of the Augsburg Confession because of the Interim and for other reasons. Therefore, it has been our purpose to state and to declare plainly, purely, and clearly in thesis and antithesis our faith and confession about each and every one of these divisions. This means we state the true doctrine and the opposite doctrine, in order that the foundation of divine truth might be clear in all articles. In this way all unlawful, doubtful, suspicious, and condemned doctrines might be exposed distinctly repudiated› (wherever and in whatever books they may be found, and whoever may have written them, or who even now may be ready to defend them). So everyone may be faithfully warned against the errors, which are spread here and there in some theologians’ writings. No one should be misled in this matter by the reputation of any person.

[20] From this declaration the Christian reader will inform himself in every emergency. He will compare it with the writings listed above, and he will find out exactly what was confessed in the beginning about each article in the comprehensive summary of our religion and faith. He will note what was later restated at different times and is repeated by us in this document. He will see that it is in no way contradictory, but is the simple, unchangeable, permanent truth. Therefore, we do not change from one doctrine to another, as our adversaries falsely assert. We eagerly desire to be found loyal to the once-delivered Augsburg Confession and its unanimously accepted Christian meaning. Through God’s grace we desire to abide firmly and constantly by the Augsburg Confession in opposition to all corruptions that have entered.
