# Wednesday — Easter 2

## Psalmody

1The LORD reigns; let the peoples | tremble!* He sits enthroned upon the cherubim; let the | earth quake! 2The LORD is great in | Zion;* he is exalted over all the | peoples. 3Let them praise your great and | awesome name!* Ho- | ly is he! 4The King in his might loves | justice.* You have established equity; you have executed justice and righteousness in | Jacob. 5Exalt the LORD our God; worship at his | footstool!* Ho- | ly is he!—Psalm 99:1–5
Additional Psalm: Psalm 79

## Old Testament Reading: Exodus 24:1–18

The Covenant Confirmed

1Then he said to Moses, “Come up to the LORD, you and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and worship from afar. 2Moses alone shall come near to the LORD, but the others shall not come near, and the people shall not come up with him.” 3Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD and all the rules. And all the people answered with one voice and said, “All the words that the LORD has spoken we will do.” 4And Moses wrote down all the words of the LORD. He rose early in the morning and built an altar at the foot of the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel. 5And he sent young men of the people of Israel, who offered burnt offerings and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen to the LORD. 6And Moses took half of the blood and put it in basins, and half of the blood he threw against the altar. 7Then he took the Book of the Covenant and read it in the hearing of the people. And they said, “All that the LORD has spoken we will do, and we will be obedient.” 8And Moses took the blood and threw it on the people and said, “Behold the blood of the covenant that the LORD has made with you in accordance with all these words.” 9Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up, 10and they saw the God of Israel. There was under his feet as it were a pavement of sapphire stone, like the very heaven for clearness. 11And he did not lay his hand on the chief men of the people of Israel; they beheld God, and ate and drank. 12The LORD said to Moses, “Come up to me on the mountain and wait there, that I may give you the tablets of stone, with the law and the commandment, which I have written for their instruction.” 13So Moses rose with his assistant Joshua, and Moses went up into the mountain of God. 14And he said to the elders, “Wait here for us until we return to you. And behold, Aaron and Hur are with you. Whoever has a dispute, let him go to them.” 15Then Moses went up on the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain. 16The glory of the LORD dwelt on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days. And on the seventh day he called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud. 17Now the appearance of the glory of the LORD was like a devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the sight of the people of Israel. 18Moses entered the cloud and went up on the mountain. And Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights.

## New Testament Reading: Luke 5:1–16

Jesus Calls the First Disciples

1On one occasion, while the crowd was pressing in on him to hear the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret, 2and he saw two boats by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them and were washing their nets. 3Getting into one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to put out a little from the land. And he sat down and taught the people from the boat. 4And when he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch.” 5And Simon answered, “Master, we toiled all night and took nothing! But at your word I will let down the nets.” 6And when they had done this, they enclosed a large number of fish, and their nets were breaking. 7They signaled to their partners in the other boat to come and help them. And they came and filled both the boats, so that they began to sink. 8But when Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, “Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.” 9For he and all who were with him were astonished at the catch of fish that they had taken, 10and so also were James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid; from now on you will be catching men.” 11And when they had brought their boats to land, they left everything and followed him.

Jesus Cleanses a Leper

12While he was in one of the cities, there came a man full of leprosy. And when he saw Jesus, he fell on his face and begged him, “Lord, if you will, you can make me clean.” 13And Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, “I will; be clean.” And immediately the leprosy left him. 14And he charged him to tell no one, but “go and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, as Moses commanded, for a proof to them.” 15But now even more the report about him went abroad, and great crowds gathered to hear him and to be healed of their infirmities. 16But he would withdraw to desolate places and pray.

## Writing

See now, I will send out many fishers, saith the Lord, whose work is to catch them. And then I will many hunters send also, whose work is to catch them on all the mountains and on all the highlands and in all of the hollows. How easily, though, could the Highest do without us And turn away his mercy from us, When our perverted hearts in evil from him part And in their stubbornness To their destruction run. But what response From his paternal spirit? Withhold his loving kindness From us, and, just as we from him, withdraw, And then betray us to the foe’s deceit and spite? No, God is all the time intending On the proper path to keep us, Sheltered by his glory’s grace. Yea, when we have gone astray And the proper way abandon, He will even have us sought for. … If God commands, then must his blessing In all that we may do Abundantly endure, E’en though both fear and care oppose us. The talent he hath given us Would he with int’rest have returned him; If only we ourselves not hide it, He gladly helps, that it may bear its fruit. What can then thee in all thy dealings frighten, If thee, my heart, God doth his hands extend? Before his merest nod doth all misfortune yield, And he, most huge in might, can shelter and protect thee. When trouble, hardship’s toil, grudge, plague and falsehood come, Intending all thou dost to harass and to hinder, Let passing discontent thy purpose not diminish; The work which he assigns will be for none too hard. With steadfast joy go forth, thou shalt see at the finish That what before caused pain occurred to bring thee blessing. Sing, pray, and walk in God’s own pathways, Perform thine own work ever true, And trust in heaven’s ample blessing, Then shall he stand by thee anew; For him who doth his confidence Rest in God, he forsaketh not.—Johann Sebastian Bach

## Hymnody

Your hand, O Lord, in days of old Was strong to heal and save; It triumphed
over ills and death, O’er darkness and the grave. To You they came, the
blind, the mute, The palsied and the lame, The lepers in their misery, The
sick with fevered frame.—Your Hand, O Lord, in Days of Old (LSB 846:1)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus, when Peter fell before You in repentance as a sinful man, You absolved him of his sins by saying to him, “Fear not”; for by Your grace, he was worthy to stand in Your presence. Send us out like Peter to catch men alive, announcing to the world the forgiveness of sins that comes through You, our only Savior and Lord; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1013)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VII 52–58

[52] All three evangelists (Matthew 26:26–28; Mark 14:22–24; Luke 22:19–20) and St. Paul, after Christ’s ascension, received the same ‹institution of the Lord’s Supper› (1 Corinthians 11:23–26). Unanimously and with the same words and syllables they repeat these distinct, clear, firm, and true words of Christ about the consecrated and distributed bread, “This is My body.” They all repeat these words in one way, without any interpretation, turn of phrase, ‹figure,› and change.

[53] Therefore, there is no doubt about the other part of the Sacrament. The words of Luke and Paul, “This cup is the new covenant in My blood,” can have no other meaning than what St. Matthew and St. Mark give: “This [namely, what you orally drink out of the cup] is My blood of the covenant,” whereby I establish, seal, and confirm with you men this: My testament and new covenant (i.e., the forgiveness of sins).

[54] St. Paul repeats, confirms, and explains Christ’s words where he writes as follows, “The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not a participation in the blood of Christ? The bread that we break, is it not a participation in the body of Christ?” (1 Corinthians 10:16). This is to be considered with all diligence and seriousness. It is an especially clear testimony of the true, essential presence and distribution of the body and blood of Christ in the Supper. From this we clearly learn that not only the cup that Christ blessed at the first Supper, and not only the bread that Christ broke and distributed, but also the bread we break and the cup we bless, is the communion of Christ’s body and blood. So all who eat this bread and drink of this cup truly receive, and are partakers of, Christ’s true body and blood.

[55] Imagine that Christ’s body was present and partaken of—not truly and essentially—but only according to its power and efficacy. Then the bread would have to be called not a communion of the body, but of the Spirit, power, and benefits of Christ, as the Apology argues and concludes [Ap X 54 Quarto].

[56] Now imagine that Paul were speaking only of the spiritual communion of Christ’s body through faith (as the Sacramentarians pervert this passage). Then Paul would not say that the bread, but that the spirit or faith, was the communion of Christ’s body. But he says that the bread is the communion of Christ’s body and that all who partake of the consecrated bread also become partakers of Christ’s body. Therefore, he must indeed be speaking not of a spiritual but of a sacramental or oral participation of Christ’s body, which is common to godly Christians and godless Christians ‹those who are Christians only in name›.

[57] This is shown also by the causes and circumstances of this entire exposition of St. Paul. For he frightens and warns those who ate of offerings to idols and had fellowship with heathen devil-worship, and nevertheless went also to the Lord’s table and became partakers of Christ’s body and blood. He warns them so that they do not receive Christ’s body and blood for judgment and condemnation to themselves. For all those who become partakers of the consecrated and broken bread in the Supper have communion also with Christ’s body. Therefore, St. Paul cannot be speaking of spiritual communion with Christ, which no person can abuse, and against which also no one is to be warned.

[58] Our dear fathers and predecessors, like Luther and other pure teachers of the Augsburg Confession, explain this statement of Paul in such a way that it agrees completely with Christ’s words. They write that the bread we break is the distributed body of Christ, or the common ‹communicated› body of Christ, distributed to those who receive the broken bread.
