# Friday after Easter

## Psalmody

1I will extol you, my | God and King,* and bless your name forever and | ever. 2Every day I will | bless you* and praise your name forever and | ever. 3Great is the LORD, and greatly | to be praised,* and his greatness is un- | searchable. 4One generation shall commend your works to an- | other,* and shall declare your | mighty acts. 5On the glorious splendor of your | majesty,* and on your wondrous works, I will | meditate. 6They shall speak of the might of your | awesome deeds,* and I will declare your | greatness. 7They shall pour forth the fame of your abundant | goodness* and shall sing aloud of your | righteousness. 8The LORD is gracious and | merciful,* slow to anger and abounding in | steadfast love. 9The LORD is | good to all,* and his mercy is over all that | he has made.—Psalm 145:1–9
Additional Psalm: Psalm 94

## Old Testament Reading: Exodus 18:5–27

Jethro’s Advice

5Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife to Moses in the wilderness where he was encamped at the mountain of God. 6And when he sent word to Moses, “I, your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons with her,” 7Moses went out to meet his father-in-law and bowed down and kissed him. And they asked each other of their welfare and went into the tent. 8Then Moses told his father-in-law all that the LORD had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, all the hardship that had come upon them in the way, and how the LORD had delivered them. 9And Jethro rejoiced for all the good that the LORD had done to Israel, in that he had delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians. 10Jethro said, “Blessed be the LORD, who has delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of Pharaoh and has delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. 11Now I know that the LORD is greater than all gods, because in this affair they dealt arrogantly with the people.” 12And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, brought a burnt offering and sacrifices to God; and Aaron came with all the elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses’ father-in-law before God. 13The next day Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood around Moses from morning till evening. 14When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said, “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit alone, and all the people stand around you from morning till evening?” 15And Moses said to his father-in-law, “Because the people come to me to inquire of God; 16when they have a dispute, they come to me and I decide between one person and another, and I make them know the statutes of God and his laws.” 17Moses’ father-in- law said to him, “What you are doing is not good. 18You and the people with you will certainly wear yourselves out, for the thing is too heavy for you. You are not able to do it alone. 19Now obey my voice; I will give you advice, and God be with you! You shall represent the people before God and bring their cases to God, 20and you shall warn them about the statutes and the laws, and make them know the way in which they must walk and what they must do. 21Moreover, look for able men from all the people, men who fear God, who are trustworthy and hate a bribe, and place such men over the people as chiefs of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens. 22And let them judge the people at all times. Every great matter they shall bring to you, but any small matter they shall decide themselves. So it will be easier for you, and they will bear the burden with you. 23If you do this, God will direct you, you will be able to endure, and all this people also will go to their place in peace.” 24So Moses listened to the voice of his father-in-law and did all that he had said. 25Moses chose able men out of all Israel and made them heads over the people, chiefs of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens. 26And they judged the people at all times. Any hard case they brought to Moses, but any small matter they decided themselves. 27Then Moses let his father-in-law depart, and he went away to his own country.

## New Testament Reading: Hebrews 12:1–24

Jesus, Founder and Perfecter of Our Faith 1Therefore, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, let us also lay aside every weight, and sin which clings so closely, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us, 2looking to Jesus, the founder and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is seated at the right hand of the throne of God.

Do Not Grow Weary

3Consider him who endured from sinners such hostility against himself, so that you may not grow weary or fainthearted. 4In your struggle against sin you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your blood. 5And have you forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as sons? “My son, do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord, nor be weary when reproved by him. 6For the Lord disciplines the one he loves, and chastises every son whom he receives.” 7It is for discipline that you have to endure. God is treating you as sons. For what son is there whom his father does not discipline? 8If you are left without discipline, in which all have participated, then you are illegitimate children and not sons. 9Besides this, we have had earthly fathers who disciplined us and we respected them. Shall we not much more be subject to the Father of spirits and live? 10For they disciplined us for a short time as it seemed best to them, but he disciplines us for our good, that we may share his holiness. 11For the moment all discipline seems painful rather than pleasant, but later it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it. 12Therefore lift your drooping hands and strengthen your weak knees, 13and make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but rather be healed. 14Strive for peace with everyone, and for the holiness without which no one will see the Lord. 15See to it that no one fails to obtain the grace of God; that no “root of bitterness” springs up and causes trouble, and by it many become defiled; 16that no one is sexually immoral or unholy like Esau, who sold his birthright for a single meal. 17For you know that afterward, when he desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no chance to repent, though he sought it with tears.

A Kingdom That Cannot Be Shaken

18For you have not come to what may be touched, a blazing fire and darkness and gloom and a tempest 19and the sound of a trumpet and a voice whose words made the hearers beg that no further messages be spoken to them. 20For they could not endure the order that was given, “If even a beast touches the mountain, it shall be stoned.” 21Indeed, so terrifying was the sight that Moses said, “I tremble with fear.” 22But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable angels in festal gathering, 23and to the assembly of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and to God, the judge of all, and to the spirits of the righteous made perfect, 24and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.

## Writing

Would you be persuaded that Christ willingly went to His passion? Others, who do not know of their death beforehand, died unwillingly. But He spoke before His passion: “Behold, the Son of Man is betrayed to be crucified.” Do you know why this Friend of Man did not shun death? It was so the whole world would not perish in its sins. “Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall be betrayed and shall be crucified.” And, “He steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem.” And would you know with certainty that the cross is a glory to Jesus? Hear His own words, not mine. Judas had become ungrateful to the Master of the house, and was about to betray Him. Having just gone forth from the table, and having drunk His cup of blessing, in return for that draught of salvation, he sought to shed righteous blood. “He who did eat of His bread, was lifting up his heel against Him.” His hands had but recently received the blessed gifts, and presently for the wages of betrayal he was plotting His death. Being reproved, and having heard that word, “You have said it,” he again went out. Then Jesus said: “The hour has come that the Son of Man should be glorified.” Do you see how He knew the cross to be His proper glory? What, should Isaiah not be ashamed of being sawn apart, and Christ should be ashamed of dying for the world? “Now is the Son of Man glorified.” Not that He was without glory before then; for He was “glorified with the glory” that was “before the foundation of the world.” He was ever glorified as God; but now He was to be glorified in wearing the crown of His patience. He did not give up His life by compulsion, nor was He put to death by murderous violence, but of His own accord. Hear what He says: “I have power to lay down My life, and I have power to take it up again. I yield it of My own choice to My enemies; for unless I so choose, this could not be.” He came, therefore, of His own set purpose to His passion, rejoicing in His noble deed, smiling at the crown, cheered by the salvation of mankind, not ashamed of the cross, for it was to save the world. For it was no common man who suffered, but God in man’s nature, striving for the prize of His patience.—Cyril of Jerusalem

## Hymnody

They call to us, “Your timid footsteps lengthen; Throw off sin’s weight,
your halting weakness strengthen. We kept the faith, we shed our blood,
were martyred; Our lives we bartered.”—Saints, See the Cloud of
Witnesses (LSB 667:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, You show those in error the light of Your truth so that they may return to the way of righteousness. Grant faithfulness to all who are admitted into the fellowship of Christ’s Church that they may avoid whatever is contrary to their confession and follow all such things as are pleasing to You; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L44)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VII 17–27

[17] In the following year, the chief theologians of the Augsburg Confession assembled from all Germany at Smalcald and deliberated about what to present in the Council about this doctrine of the Church. By common consent the Smalcald Articles were composed by Dr. Luther and signed by all the theologians, jointly and severally. In these articles the proper and true meaning is clearly expressed in short, plain words. They agree most accurately with Christ’s words. Every device and loophole is barred to the Sacramentarians.

[18] (They had interpreted the Formula Concordiae—the abovementioned articles of union, framed the preceding year—to their advantage. They perverted them to say that Christ’s body is offered with the bread in no other way than as it is offered, together with all His benefits, by the Word of the Gospel. And by the “sacramental union” only the spiritual presence of the Lord Christ by faith is meant).

[19] Here is what [the Smalcald Articles III VI 1] declare:

The bread and wine in the Supper are Christ’s true body and blood. These are given and received not only by the godly but also by wicked Christians. [1 Corinthians 11:29–30]

[20] Dr. Luther has also more fully expounded and confirmed this opinion from God’s Word in the Large Catechism [V 8], where it is written:

“Now, what is the Sacrament of the Altar?” Answer, “It is the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, in and under the bread and wine, which we Christians are commanded by Christ’s Word to eat and to drink.”

[21] And shortly after [LC V 10]:

It is the Word, I say, that makes and sets this Sacrament apart. So it is not mere bread and wine, but is, and is called, Christ’s body and blood (1 Corinthians 11:23–27).

[22] Again [V 12–19]:

With this Word you can strengthen your conscience and say, “If a hundred thousand devils, together with all fanatics, should rush forward, crying, ‘How can bread and wine be Christ’s body and blood?’ and such, I know that all spirits and scholars together are not as wise as is the Divine Majesty in His little finger” [see 1 Corinthians 1:25]. Now here stands Christ’s Word, “Take, eat; this is My body....Drink of it, all of you; this is My blood of the new testament,” and so on. Here we stop to watch those who will call themselves His masters and make the matter different from what He has spoken.

[23] It is true, indeed, that if you take away the Word or regard the Sacrament without the words, you have nothing but mere bread and wine. But if the words remain with them, as they shall and must, then, by virtue of the words, it is truly Christ’s body and blood. What Christ’s lips say and speak, so it is. He can never lie or deceive [Titus 1:2].

[24] It is easy to reply to all kinds of questions about which people are troubled at the present time, such as this one: “Can even a wicked priest serve at and administer the Sacrament?” And whatever other questions like this there may be. For here we conclude and say, “Even though an imposter takes or distributes the Sacrament, a person still receives the true Sacrament, that is, Christ’s true body and blood, just as truly as a person who receives or administers it in the most worthy way.” For the Sacrament is not founded upon people’s holiness, but upon God’s Word. Just as no saint on earth, indeed, no angel in heaven, can make bread and wine be Christ’s body and blood, so also no one can change or alter it, even though it is misused.

[25] The Word by which it became a Sacrament and was instituted does not become false because of the person or his unbelief. For Christ does not say, “If you believe or are worthy, you receive My body and blood.” No, He says, “Take, eat and drink; this is My body and blood.”

[26] Likewise, He says, “Do this” (i.e., what I now do, institute, give, and ask you, take). That is like saying, “No matter whether you are worthy or unworthy, you have here His body and blood by virtue of these words that are added to the bread and wine.” Note and remember this well. For upon these words rest all our foundation, protection, and defense against all errors and deception that have ever come or may yet come.

[27] This is what the Large Catechism says, in which the true presence of Christ’s body and blood in the Holy Supper is established from God’s Word. This ‹presence› is understood to be received not only by the believing and worthy, but also by the unbelieving and unworthy.
