# Wednesday after Easter

## Psalmody

1Come, bless the LORD, all you servants | of the LORD,* who stand by night in the house | of the LORD! 2Lift up your hands to the | holy place* and | bless the LORD! 3May the LORD bless you from | Zion,* he who made | heaven and earth!—Psalm 134
Additional Psalm: Psalm 135

## Old Testament Reading: Exodus 16:13–35

[Bread from Heaven]

13In the evening quail came up and covered the camp, and in the morning dew lay around the camp. 14And when the dew had gone up, there was on the face of the wilderness a fine, flake-like thing, fine as frost on the ground. 15When the people of Israel saw it, they said to one another, “What is it?” For they did not know what it was. And Moses said to them, “It is the bread that the LORD has given you to eat. 16This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Gather of it, each one of you, as much as he can eat. You shall each take an omer, according to the number of the persons that each of you has in his tent.’” 17And the people of Israel did so. They gathered, some more, some less. 18But when they measured it with an omer, whoever gathered much had nothing left over, and whoever gathered little had no lack. Each of them gathered as much as he could eat. 19And Moses said to them, “Let no one leave any of it over till the morning.” 20But they did not listen to Moses. Some left part of it till the morning, and it bred worms and stank. And Moses was angry with them. 21Morning by morning they gathered it, each as much as he could eat; but when the sun grew hot, it melted. 22On the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers each. And when all the leaders of the congregation came and told Moses, 23he said to them, “This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Tomorrow is a day of solemn rest, a holy Sabbath to the LORD; bake what you will bake and boil what you will boil, and all that is left over lay aside to be kept till the morning.’” 24So they laid it aside till the morning, as Moses commanded them, and it did not stink, and there were no worms in it. 25Moses said, “Eat it today, for today is a Sabbath to the LORD; today you will not find it in the field. 26Six days you shall gather it, but on the seventh day, which is a Sabbath, there will be none.” 27On the seventh day some of the people went out to gather, but they found none. 28And the LORD said to Moses, “How long will you refuse to keep my commandments and my laws? 29See! The LORD has given you the Sabbath; therefore on the sixth day he gives you bread for two days. Remain each of you in his place; let no one go out of his place on the seventh day.” 30So the people rested on the seventh day. 31Now the house of Israel called its name manna. It was like coriander seed, white, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey. 32Moses said, “This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Let an omer of it be kept throughout your generations, so that they may see the bread with which I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.’” 33And Moses said to Aaron, “Take a jar, and put an omer of manna in it, and place it before the LORD to be kept throughout your generations.” 34As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron placed it before the testimony to be kept. 35The people of Israel ate the manna forty years, till they came to a habitable land. They ate the manna till they came to the border of the land of Canaan.

## New Testament Reading: Hebrews 10:19–39

The Full Assurance of Faith

19Therefore, brothers, since we have confidence to enter the holy places by the blood of Jesus, 20by the new and living way that he opened for us through the curtain, that is, through his flesh, 21and since we have a great priest over the house of God, 22let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, with our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water. 23Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is faithful. 24And let us consider how to stir up one another to love and good works, 25not neglecting to meet together, as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another, and all the more as you see the Day drawing near. 26For if we go on sinning deliberately after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, 27but a fearful expectation of judgment, and a fury of fire that will consume the adversaries. 28Anyone who has set aside the law of Moses dies without mercy on the evidence of two or three witnesses. 29How much worse punishment, do you think, will be deserved by the one who has spurned the Son of God, and has profaned the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and has outraged the Spirit of grace? 30For we know him who said, “Vengeance is mine; I will repay.” And again, “The Lord will judge his people.” 31It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 32But recall the former days when, after you were enlightened, you endured a hard struggle with sufferings, 33sometimes being publicly exposed to reproach and affliction, and sometimes being partners with those so treated. 34For you had compassion on those in prison, and you joyfully accepted the plundering of your property, since you knew that you yourselves had a better possession and an abiding one. 35Therefore do not throw away your confidence, which has a great reward. 36For you have need of endurance, so that when you have done the will of God you may receive what is promised. 37For, “Yet a little while, and the coming one will come and will not delay; 38but my righteous one shall live by faith, and if he shrinks back, my soul has no pleasure in him.” 39But we are not of those who shrink back and are destroyed, but of those who have faith and preserve their souls.

## Writing

For just as the truth of this divine promise, once pronounced over us, continues until death, so our faith in it ought never to cease, but to be nourished and strengthened until death by the continual remembrance of this promise made to us in baptism. Therefore, when we rise from our sins or repent, we are merely returning to the power and the faith of baptism from which we fell, and finding our way back to the promise then made to us, which we deserted when we sinned. For the truth of the promise once made remains steadfast, always ready to receive us back with open arms when we return.… It will therefore be no small gain to a penitent to remember above all his baptism, and, confidently calling to mind the divine promise which he has forsaken, acknowledge that promise before his Lord, rejoicing that he is still within the fortress of salvation because he has been baptized, and abhorring his wicked ingratitude in falling away from its faith and truth. His heart will find wonderful comfort and will be encouraged to hope for mercy when he considers that the promise which God made to him, which cannot possibly lie, is still unbroken and unchanged, and indeed, cannot be changed by sins, as Paul says (II Tim. 2[:13]): “If we are faithless, he remains faithful—for he cannot deny himself.” This truth of God, I say, will sustain him, so that if all else should fail, this truth, if he believes in it, will not fail him. In it the penitent has a shield against all assaults of the scornful enemy, an answer to the sins that disturb his conscience, an antidote for the dread of death and judgment, and a comfort in every temptation—namely, this one truth—when he says: “God is faithful in his promises [Heb. 10:23; 11:11], and I received his sign in baptism. If God is for me, who is against me?”[Rom. 8:31].—martin luther

## Hymnody

Then let us now draw near, Washed in that precious flood And enter the
Most Holy Place By Jesus’ blood. From hearts that are sincere, Let tongues
our hope profess, And trust anew God’s faithful grace That we confess.—
Christ Sits at God’s Right Hand (LSB 564:5)

## Prayer of the Day

Almighty God, by the glorious resurrection of Your Son, Jesus Christ, You destroyed death and brought life and immortal-ity to light. Grant that we who have been raised with Him may abide in His presence and rejoice in the hope of eternal glory; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (L40)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VII 1–8

[1] In the opinion of some people, the comments in this article should perhaps not be included in this document. We intend to explain the articles that have been drawn into controversy among the theologians of the Augsburg Confession. (When the Confession was first written and presented to the Emperor at Augsburg in 1530, the Sacramentarians soon withdrew entirely and separated. They presented their own Confession.) Still, some theologians and others who boast about the Augsburg Confession have agreed in this article with the Sacramentarians during the last few years. They no longer speak secretly, but partly public. They have labored against their own conscience to force and to pervert the Augsburg Confession to make it entirely in harmony with the Sacramentarian teaching in this article. We neither can nor should leave out our testimony by our confession of the divine truth in this document. We must repeat the true sense and proper understanding of Christ’s words and of the Augsburg Confession on this article. ‹We recognize this to be our duty.› So far as we are able, by God’s help, we shall preserve ‹this pure doctrine› also for posterity. We will faithfully warn our hearers, together with other godly Christians, against this deadly error, which is entirely contrary to the divine Word and the Augsburg Confession, and has been frequently condemned.

## STATUS OF THE CONTROVERSY

The Chief Controversy between Our Teaching and That of the Sacramentarians in This Article

[2] Some Sacramentarians strive to use words that come as close as possible to the Augsburg Confession and the form and way of speech in ‹our› churches. They confess that in the Holy Supper Christ’s body is truly received by believers. Still, when we insist that they state their meaning precisely, sincerely, and clearly, they all say this in unison: Christ’s true essential body and blood is absent from the consecrated bread and wine in the Holy Supper as far as the highest heaven is from the earth. For their own words state this, “We say that Christ’s body and blood are as far from the signs as the earth is distant from the highest

[3] heaven.” Therefore, they understand this presence of Christ’s body not as a presence here on earth, but only with respect to faith. In other words, our faith is reminded and excited by the visible signs, just as it is by the Word preached. It elevates itself and ascends above all heavens. It receives and enjoys Christ’s body, which is present there in heaven. Yes, they say they receive Christ Himself, together with all His benefits, in a true and essential way, but nevertheless only in a spiritual way. For they hold that as the bread and wine are here on earth and not in heaven, so Christ’s body is now in heaven and not on earth. So nothing else is received by the mouth in the Holy Supper than bread and wine.

[4] Originally, they asserted that the Lord’s Supper is only an outward sign, by which Christians are known. They held that nothing else is offered in the Supper than mere bread and wine (which are bare signs ‹symbols› of Christ’s absent body). When this fiction would not stand the test, they confessed that the Lord Christ is truly present in His Supper. They said He is present by the communication of attributes, that is, according to His divine nature alone, but not with His body and blood.

[5] Afterward, when they were forced by Christ’s words to confess that Christ’s body is present in the Supper, they still understood and declared only a spiritual presence. They declared it was a partaking through faith of His power through faith, efficacy, and benefits. For they say Christ’s Spirit is everywhere and dwells here on earth. Therefore, through the Spirit our bodies are united with Christ’s body, which is in heaven.

[6] The result was that many noble people were deceived by these fine, praise-worthy words when they asserted and boasted that they were of no other opinion than that the Lord Christ is present in His Supper truly, essentially, and as a living person. They understand this according to His divine nature alone, and not of His body and blood. They say His body and blood are now in heaven, and nowhere else. He gives us His true body and blood with the bread and wine to eat, to partake of them spiritually through faith, but not bodily with the mouth.

[7] They understand the words of the Supper, “Eat; this is My body,” not properly, as they read, according to the letter, but as figurative expressions. So eating Christ’s body means nothing other than believing. Body means a symbol, that is, a sign or figure of Christ’s body. The body is not in the Supper on earth, but only in heaven. The word is they interpret sacramentally, or in a symbolic way. They do this so that no one may think that Christ’s flesh is joined with the signs and is now present on earth in an invisible way, beyond our understanding.

[8] In other words, Christ’s body is united with the bread sacramentally, or symbolically. So believing, godly Christians do partake spiritually of Christ’s body (which is above, in heaven) just as they eat the bread with the mouth. But they are used to cursing and condemning the following as a horrible blasphemy: Christ’s body is essentially present here on earth in the Supper, although invisibly and in a way beyond understanding. It is received orally, with the consecrated bread, even by hypocrites or those who only appear to be Christians.
