# Tuesday — Easter 3

## Psalmody

11Teach me your way, O LORD, that I may walk | in your truth;* unite my heart to | fear your name. 12I give thanks to you, O Lord my God, with | my whole heart,* and I will glorify your name for- | ever. 13For great is your steadfast | love toward me;* you have delivered my soul from the depths | of Sheol. 14O God, insolent men have risen up against me; a band of ruthless men | seek my life,* and they do not set you be- | fore them. 15But you, O Lord, are a God merciful and | gracious,* slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love and | faithfulness. 16Turn to me and be gra- | cious to me;* give your strength to your servant, and save the son of your maid- | servant. 17Show me a sign of your | favor,* that those who hate me may see and be put to shame because you, LORD, have helped me and com- | forted me.—Psalm 86:11–17
Additional Psalm: Psalm 34

## Old Testament Reading: Exodus 34:1–28

Moses Makes New Tablets

1The LORD said to Moses, “Cut for yourself two tablets of stone like the first, and I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke. 2Be ready by the morning, and come up in the morning to Mount Sinai, and present yourself there to me on the top of the mountain. 3No one shall come up with you, and let no one be seen throughout all the mountain. Let no flocks or herds graze opposite that mountain.” 4So Moses cut two tablets of stone like the first. And he rose early in the morning and went up on Mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand two tablets of stone. 5The LORD descended in the cloud and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD. 6The LORD passed before him and proclaimed, “The LORD, the LORD, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, 7keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children and the children’s children, to the third and the fourth generation.” 8And Moses quickly bowed his head toward the earth and worshiped. 9And he said, “If now I have found favor in your sight, O Lord, please let the Lord go in the midst of us, for it is a stiff-necked people, and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for your inheritance.”

The Covenant Renewed

10And he said, “Behold, I am making a covenant. Before all your people I will do marvels, such as have not been created in all the earth or in any nation. And all the people among whom you are shall see the work of the LORD, for it is an awesome thing that I will do with you. 11“Observe what I command you this day. Behold, I will drive out before you the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites. 12Take care, lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land to which you go, lest it become a snare in your midst. 13You shall tear down their altars and break their pillars and cut down their Asherim 14(for you shall worship no other god, for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God), 15lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and when they whore after their gods and sacrifice to their gods and you are invited, you eat of his sacrifice, 16and you take of their daughters for your sons, and their daughters whore after their gods and make your sons whore after their gods. 17“You shall not make for yourself any gods of cast metal. 18“You shall keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the time appointed in the month Abib, for in the month Abib you came out from Egypt. 19All that open the womb are mine, all your male livestock, the firstborn of cow and sheep. 20The firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb, or if you will not redeem it you shall break its neck. All the firstborn of your sons you shall redeem. And none shall appear before me empty-handed. 21“Six days you shall work, but on the seventh day you shall rest. In plowing time and in harvest you shall rest. 22You shall observe the Feast of Weeks, the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the Feast of Ingathering at the year’s end. 23Three times in the year shall all your males appear before the LORD God, the God of Israel. 24For I will cast out nations before you and enlarge your borders; no one shall covet your land, when you go up to appear before the LORD your God three times in the year. 25“You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with anything leavened, or let the sacrifice of the Feast of the Passover remain until the morning. 26The best of the firstfruits of your ground you shall bring to the house of the LORD your God. You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.” 27And the LORD said to Moses, “Write these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.” 28So he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights. He neither ate bread nor drank water. And he wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the Ten Commandments.

## New Testament Reading: Luke 7:18–35

Messengers from John the Baptist

18The disciples of John reported all these things to him. And John, 19calling two of his disciples to him, sent them to the Lord, saying, “Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another?” 20And when the men had come to him, they said, “John the Baptist has sent us to you, saying, ‘Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another?’” 21In that hour he healed many people of diseases and plagues and evil spirits, and on many who were blind he bestowed sight. 22And he answered them, “Go and tell John what you have seen and heard: the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, the poor have good news preached to them. 23And blessed is the one who is not offended by me.” 24When John’s messengers had gone, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? 25What then did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are dressed in splendid clothing and live in luxury are in kings’ courts. 26What then did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet. 27This is he of whom it is written, “‘Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.’ 28I tell you, among those born of women none is greater than John. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.” 29(When all the people heard this, and the tax collectors too, they declared God just, having been baptized with the baptism of John, 30but the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the purpose of God for themselves, not having been baptized by him.) 31“To what then shall I compare the people of this generation, and what are they like? 32They are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling to one another, “‘We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not weep.’ 33For John the Baptist has come eating no bread and drinking no wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’ 34The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Look at him! A glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ 35Yet wisdom is justified by all her children.”

## Writing

Christ as a man was in the Father’s thoughts from the beginning, because the Word was to be both clay and flesh just as the earth was then. Thus the Father said to the Son: “Let Us make man in Our own image, after Our likeness.” And God made man, that is to say, He molded and fashioned the creature, and made him after His own image, that is, in the image of Christ. And the Word was God also, and He was in the image of God, who “thought it not robbery to be equal to God.” So it is that the clay which was even then putting on the image of Christ, who was to come in the flesh, was not only the work of God but also God’s pledge and promise. … God forbid that He should abandon to everlasting destruction the labor of His own hands, the care of His own thoughts, the receptacle of His own Spirit, the queen of His creation, the inheritor of His freedom, the priestess of His religion, the champion of His testimony, the sister of His Christ! … Now, as He requires from us love to our neighbor, after love of Himself, so He will do what He has commanded. He will love the flesh [mankind], which is His neighbor. He will love it, though it is infirm, since His “strength is made perfect in weakness.” He will love it, though it is disordered, since “those who are whole do not need a physician, but those who are sick.” He will love it, though it is dis-honorable, since “we bestow more abundant honor on the less honorable members.” He will love it, though it is ruined, since He says, “I am come to save that which was lost.” He will love it, though it is sinful, since He says, “I desire the salvation of the sinner.” He will love it, though it is condemned, for He says “I shall wound and also heal.”—Tertullian

## Hymnody

He comes the broken heart to bind, The bleeding soul to cure, And with the
treasures of His grace To enrich the humble poor.—Hark the Glad Sound
(LSB 349:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord Jesus, prepare us to receive Your very body and blood by giving us repentance to weep over our sins and then rejoice that in You the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have Good News preached to them; for You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. (1015)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord VII 85–90

[85] To preserve this true Christian doctrine about the Holy Supper, and to avoid and abolish many idolatrous abuses and perversions of this testament, the following useful rule and standard has been derived from the words of institution: Nothing has the nature of a Sacrament apart from the use instituted by Christ or apart from the action divinely instituted. This means, if Christ’s institution is not kept as He appointed it, then there is no Sacrament. This is by no means to be rejected, but can and should be encouraged and maintained with benefit in God’s Church.

[86] The use or action here does not mean chiefly faith. Nor does it mean the oral participation alone. It means the entire external, visible action of the Lord’s Supper instituted by Christ: the consecration, or words of institution, the distribution and reception, or oral partaking of the consecrated bread and wine, of Christ’s body and blood.

[87] Apart from this use, it is to be regarded as no Sacrament, like when the bread is not distributed in the papistic Mass but is offered up as a sacrifice or enclosed, carried around, and exhibited for adoration. Likewise, the water of Baptism, when used to consecrate bells or to cure leprosy, or otherwise exhibited for worship, is no Sacrament or Baptism. This rule has been established at the beginning against these papistic abuses and has been explained by Dr. Luther himself [see Martin Luther’s Second Letter to Simon Wolferinus (July 20, 1543), Luther’s Works, Latin, Jena Edition 4:585; also in WA Br. 10:348–49].

[88] Meanwhile, we must call attention to the fact that the Sacramentarians artfully and wickedly pervert this useful and necessary rule. They do this to deny the true, essential presence and oral partaking of Christ’s body, which happens here on earth by both the worthy and the unworthy. They interpret this rule as referring to the spiritual and inner use of faith. They speak as though it were no Sacrament to the unworthy, and the partaking of the body happened only spiritually, through faith. Or they speak as though faith made Christ’s body present in the Holy Supper, and therefore unworthy, unbelieving hypocrites do not receive Christ’s body as being present.

[89] It is not our faith that makes the Sacrament, but only the true Word and institution of our almighty God and Savior, Jesus Christ. His Word always is and remains effective in the Christian Church. It is not invalidated or rendered ineffective by the worthiness or unworthiness of the minister, nor by the unbelief of the one who receives it. This is just like the Gospel. Even though godless hearers do not believe it, the Gospel is and remains nonetheless the true Gospel, only it does not work for salvation in the unbelieving. So whether those who receive the Sacrament believe or do not believe, Christ remains nonetheless true in His words when He says, “Take, eat; this is My body.” He makes Himself present not by our faith, but by His almighty power.

[90] It is a deadly, shameless error that some people cunningly pervert this familiar rule to say that faith makes Christ’s body present and partakes of it, rather than the almighty power of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
