# Tuesday — Easter 7

## Psalmody

1Praise the LORD! I will give thanks to the LORD with my | whole heart,* in the company of the upright, in the congre- | gation. 2Great are the works | of the LORD,* studied by all who de- | light in them. 3Full of splendor and majesty | is his work,* and his righteousness endures for- | ever. 4He has caused his wondrous works to be re- | membered;* the LORD is gracious and | merciful. 5He provides food for those who | fear him;* he remembers his covenant for- | ever. 6He has shown his people the power | of his works,* in giving them the inheritance of the | nations. 7The works of his hands are faith- | ful and just;* all his precepts are | trustworthy; 8they are established forever and | ever,* to be performed with faithfulness and up- | rightness. 9He sent redemption to his people; he has commanded his covenant for- | ever.* Holy and awesome | is his name! 10The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom; all those who practice it have a good under- | standing.* His praise endures for- | ever!—Psalm 111
Additional Psalm: Psalm 45

## Old Testament Reading: Numbers 16:1–22

Korah’s Rebellion

1Now Korah the son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and On the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men. 2And they rose up before Moses, with a number of the people of Israel, 250 chiefs of the congregation, chosen from the assembly, well- known men. 3They assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron and said to them, “You have gone too far! For all in the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them. Why then do you exalt yourselves above the assembly of the LORD?” 4When Moses heard it, he fell on his face, 5and he said to Korah and all his company, “In the morning the LORD will show who is his, and who is holy, and will bring him near to him. The one whom he chooses he will bring near to him. 6Do this: take censers, Korah and all his company; 7put fire in them and put incense on them before the LORD tomorrow, and the man whom the LORD chooses shall be the holy one. You have gone too far, sons of Levi!” 8And Moses said to Korah, “Hear now, you sons of Levi: 9is it too small a thing for you that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do service in the tabernacle of the LORD and to stand before the congregation to minister to them, 10and that he has brought you near him, and all your brothers the sons of Levi with you? And would you seek the priesthood also? 11Therefore it is against the LORD that you and all your company have gathered together.

What is Aaron that you grumble against him?”

12And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and they said, “We will not come up. 13Is it a small thing that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, that you must also make yourself a prince over us? 14Moreover, you have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of fields and vineyards. Will you put out the eyes of these men? We will not come up.” 15And Moses was very angry and said to the LORD, “Do not respect their offering. I have not taken one donkey from them, and I have not harmed one of them.” 16And Moses said to Korah, “Be present, you and all your company, before the LORD, you and they, and Aaron, tomorrow. 17And let every one of you take his censer and put incense on it, and every one of you bring before the LORD his censer, 250 censers; you also, and Aaron, each his censer.” 18So every man took his censer and put fire in them and laid incense on them and stood at the entrance of the tent of meeting with Moses and Aaron. 19Then Korah assembled all the congregation against them at the entrance of the tent of meeting. And the glory of the LORD appeared to all the congregation. 20And the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 21“Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.” 22And they fell on their faces and said, “O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and will you be angry with all the congregation?”

## New Testament Reading: Luke 19:11–28

The Parable of the Ten Minas

11As they heard these things, he pro-ceeded to tell a parable, because he was near to Jerusalem, and because they supposed that the kingdom of God was to appear immediately. 12He said therefore, “A nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom and then return. 13Calling ten of his servants, he gave them ten minas, and said to them, ‘Engage in business until I come.’ 14But his citizens hated him and sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We do not want this man to reign over us.’ 15When he returned, having received the kingdom, he ordered these servants to whom he had given the money to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by doing business. 16The first came before him, saying, ‘Lord, your mina has made ten minas more.’ 17And he said to him, ‘Well done, good servant! Because you have been faithful in a very little, you shall have authority over ten cities.’ 18And the second came, saying, ‘Lord, your mina has made five minas.’ 19And he said to him, ‘And you are to be over five cities.’ 20Then another came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your mina, which I kept laid away in a handkerchief; 21for I was afraid of you, because you are a severe man. You take what you did not deposit, and reap what you did not sow.’ 22He said to him, ‘I will condemn you with your own words, you wicked servant! You knew that I was a severe man, taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow? 23Why then did you not put my money in the bank, and at my coming I might have collected it with interest?’ 24And he said to those who stood by, ‘Take the mina from him, and give it to the one who has the ten minas.’ 25And they said to him, ‘Lord, he has ten minas!’ 26‘I tell you that to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away. 27But as for these enemies of mine, who did not want me to reign over them, bring them here and slaughter them before me.’” 28And when he had said these things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.

## Writing

What the Gospels say is to be regarded in the light of promises of good things. And we must say that the good things the apostles announce in this Gospel are simply Jesus. One good thing they announce is the resurrection. But the resurrection is in a manner Jesus, for Jesus says: “I am the resurrection.” Jesus preaches to the poor those things which are laid up for the saints, calling them to the divine promises. And the Holy Scriptures bear witness to the Gospel announcements made by the apostles and to that made by our Savior. David says of the apostles: “The Lord shall give the word to those who preach with great power; the King of the powers of the beloved.” Thus David teaches that it is divine power and not skillfully composed discourse, mode of delivery, or well-practiced eloquence that produces conviction. Hence also Paul says: “I will know not the word that is puffed up, but the power; for the kingdom of God is not in word but in power.” And in another passage: “And my word and my preaching were not persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of power.” To this power Simon and Cleopas bear witness when they say: “Was not our heart burning within us by the way, as He opened to us the Scriptures?” And the apostles, according to the measure God gave, had great power, according to the word of David: “The Lord will give the word to the preachers with great power.” Isaiah, too, says: “How beautiful are the feet of them that proclaim good tidings.” Isaiah sees how beautiful and how opportune was the announcement of the apostles who walked in Him who said, “I am the way.” And Isaiah praises the feet of those who walk in the intellectual way of Christ Jesus, and through that door go in to God. Those whose feet are beautiful announce good tidings, namely, they announce Jesus.—Origen

## Hymnody

The world seeks after wealth And all that mammon offers Yet never is
content Though gold should fill its coffers. I have a higher good, Content
with it I’ll be: My Jesus is my wealth. What is the world to me!—What Is
the World to Me (LSB 730:3)

## Prayer of the Day

Lord God, heavenly Father, as we struggle here below with divisions among us, searching for peace among men, remind us daily of the peace of heaven purchased through the bloody death and triumphant resurrection of Your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord, who with You and the Holy Spirit is one God, now and forever. (1023)

## Suggested Reading from the Book of Concord

Solid Declaration of the Formula of Concord XI 27–32
