# Colossians 2:20-3:17

The last verses in Colossians 2 and the first 17 verses of Colossians 3 present some of the most beautiful encouragements to sanctification in Scripture. We will be breaking into Paul’s thought in midstream, but 2:20 is a good place to start.

At the end of chapter 2, Paul distinguishes between the “basic principles of this world,” that is, the way the people of the world strive to become holy, and God’s way to holiness. He writes:

Since you died with Christ to the basic principles of this world, why, as though you still belonged to it, do you submit to its rules: “Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not touch!”? These are all destined to perish with use, because they are based on human commands and teachings. Such regulations indeed have an appearance of wisdom, with their self-imposed worship, their false humility and their harsh treatment of the body, but they lack any value in restraining sensual indulgence. (Colossians 2:20-23)

In verse 20 Paul says the same thing that he said in Romans 6 and 7. We died with Christ. We are living new lives in service to him. This new life dominates us. One of the ways we serve the Lord is by avoiding the world’s methods of “selfimprovement.” The world works with rules. The world operates on the basis of human reason and teachings. Yes, Paul says, these rules appear wise. The world’s worship seems reasonable, especially when it is accompanied by humility and harsh treatment of the body. But these rules do nothing to motivate and enable a truly God-pleasing life.

How does a God-pleasing life come about? It comes about when we know we have died with Christ to sin and the curse of the law. It happens when we remember the counterpart of our death in Christ, namely, our resurrection with him and the fact that we are now in heaven with him.

Since, then, you have been raised with Christ, set your hearts on things above, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God. Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things. For you died, and your life is now hidden with Christ in God. When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory. (Colossians 3:1-4)

When we truly take to heart what Paul says here, we cannot help but be launched into a life of service to God. We have been “raised with Christ.” The Lord with whom we have been raised has ascended into heaven and now is “seated at the right hand of God.” Spiritually, that’s where we are too, As Paul puts it, we are “hidden with Christ in God.” Then follows a rather surprising statement. When Christ appears, we “also

will appear with him in glory.” The Bible tells us that when we see Christ coming in the heavens, we should lift up our heads because our redemption is drawing near (Luke 21:28). Here in Colossians, however, Paul says that when Christ comes again, we will appear “with” him in glory. We physically live here on earth, but we are also spiritually in heaven with the Lord. Sometimes Christians are asked where they want to be when Jesus returns. The fact that we are with him in heaven right now affords a fine answer to that question. At this point Paul tells us what to do:

Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires and greed, which is idolatry. Because of these, the wrath of God is coming. You used to walk in these ways, in the life you once lived. But now you must rid yourselves of all such things as these: anger, rage, malice, slander, and filthy language from your lips. Do not lie to each other, since you have taken off your old self with its practices and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator. (Colossians 3:5-10)

Because we are with Christ, who is in heaven, we are to put to death the sins that belong to the sinful nature. Notice the gospel elements woven into this section. The life we “once lived,” we live no longer. We have “taken off” the old self with its practices and have “put on the new self.” This is not something we should do but something we have done already. It’s a status we enjoy because we have died and risen with Christ. The old self is gone. The new self is here, and by God’s power we are being “renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator.”

In the following verses, Paul continually weaves the gospel into his exhortations:

Here there is no Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all, and is in all. Therefore, as God’s chosen people, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness and patience. Bear with each other and forgive whatever grievances you may have against one

another. Forgive as the Lord forgave you. And over all these virtues put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity. Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, since as members of one body you were called to peace. And be thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and as you sing psalms, hymns and spiritual songs with gratitude in your hearts to God. And whatever you do, whether in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him. (Colossians 3:11-17)

We are not to view social distinctions as a reason for segregation. Why? Because all that we have stems from one source, Christ, and he is living in all of us. We are to clothe ourselves with God-pleasing virtues because we are “God’s chosen people, holy and dearly loved” by the Lord. We are to forgive because “the Lord forgave you.” We are to live in peace with one another because “as members of one body you were called to peace.” The Word of God is to dwell in us “richly,” a word reminding us of the rich promises that are found in that Word. We give thanks to God and do everything we do “in the name of the Lord Jesus,” that is, because we are joined with him and experience his rich blessings.
