# 1 Peter 1:13-2:24

From the context of 1 Peter, we see that the Christians in Asia Minor to whom Peter wrote were suffering persecution. Peter encouraged his readers to remain firm in the faith. In the process, Peter gives us a wonderful example of a Christian pastor weaving the gospel into his admonitions. I will not print out every verse of this section. You may wish to read 1 Peter 1:13-2:24 on your own.

In the face of suffering, Peter encouraged his readers to “prepare your minds for action” and to “be self-controlled.” This encouragement leads into a promise of future glory. They were to “set [their] hope fully on the grace to be given [them] when Jesus Christ is revealed.” Hope, grace, Christ’s appearing: these are all messages of the gospel, which alone could prepare them for action and give them self-control.

As obedient children, Peter reminds them to put away the evil desires they had before they came to faith. They were to be holy, as God is holy. Here is much encouragement to live a sanctified life. But notice the gospel touch that sets the pace for the passage. Peter was writing to “obedient children.” Two thoughts are woven together in this beautiful two-word phrase. His readers were “children,” children of God, who loved them. Peter also saw that they were obedient children. We ask, “How can he call them obedient children? After all, they hadn’t yet had a chance to do what Peter tells them to do.” True, but Peter knew the Holy Spirit was living in them, and he knew that through the Spirit they were putting to

death the misdeeds of the flesh. Peter was not ingratiating himself to them so they would follow his instructions. He was simply stating a fact. They were new creatures through their death and life to God in Christ.

In verse 17 Peter warns his readers that they should call on the Father who judges all people impartially and that they should live in reverent fear of his justice. But he weaves the gospel into his admonition by reminding them that they are “strangers” in this world, which, in turn, reminds them of their citizenship in heaven. Then in verses 18 and 19, Peter launches into a gospel passage that every confirmation-age child memorizes:

You know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you from your forefathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or defect. (1 Peter 1:18,19)

Peter encourages his readers to “love one another deeply, from the heart” (verse 22). He knows his encouragement will not be in vain, for his readers have been purified by obeying the truth (another way of saying they believed God’s truth about Christ) and already have sincere love for their brothers. Again we see an odd combination of phrases. Peter tells his readers to love, and then he tells them they can do that because they already love their brothers in faith. However, we do understand his way of speaking. His readers know the love of Christ, and they love because God loved them first. But because they still have their old sinful flesh that can only hate, they need to be reminded of what God has made them to be, and they need to be encouraged to live according to the new life God has created in them.

After encouraging them to love, Peter reminds them of their rebirth through the living and enduring Word of God. Peter then reminds them of their own frailty, again preaching the law to them: “All men are like grass. ... the grass withers and the flowers fall.” But God’s Word, the Word that has given them new life, “stands forever.” And so will they if they hold on to their faith.

Back and forth Peter goes, weaving a tapestry of sin and grace that will cover and shield his persecuted readers in all temptations.

We could go on and analyze 1 Peter 2:1-24 in the same way. But do this on your own. Isolate every verse in which the apostle instructs his readers to do something in service to God. Then ask yourself, What piece of gospel motivation is woven together with this admonition or encouragement? Then look carefully at the gospel encouragements. How many of the elements that we have looked at in the preceding chapters of this book can you find in these verses? Look for little words nestled in the text. Look at each word and phrase carefully. What thoughts does that word or phrase conjure up in your mind—about your relationship with God in Christ, how the Spirit is working in you through the various aspects of the gospel, or the hope you have in heaven?

As you meditate on these beautiful gospel phrases, see how they lift you up and create in you a desire to serve the Lord. Notice that when you come to the law passages—the passages that encourage sanctification—you find yourself willing and eager to follow them. They are no longer oppressive. They are no longer sources of guilt and frustration. They no longer stir up your sinful nature to rebel against the Lord. (Although as long as the sinful nature is present, it will try and use these passages against you.) Rather, these passages are welcome admonitions to serve the Lord, who redeemed you to himself.
